https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page |||Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 5,393,689 articles in English Arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From today's featured article Stephen Breyer Heffernan v. City of Paterson was a U.S. Supreme Court case concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees, decided on April 26, 2016. Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey, police force, was seen with a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor. Heffernan's supervisors mistakenly thought that he was actively supporting the challenger and demoted him. He brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his right to free speech. Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer (pictured) cited the Court's precedents, which had held that it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not actually engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed but not that his constitutional rights had been violated. (Full article...) Recently featured: George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore "The Shape of Things to Come" (Lost) Shakespeare authorship question Archive By email More featured articles... Did you know... Unita Blackwell ... that civil rights activist Unita Blackwell (pictured) was the first African-American woman to be elected mayor in the state of Mississippi? ... that soldiers lined up on the sinking British troopship SS Tyndareus began to sing "It's a Long Way to Tipperary" while waiting for orders? ... that many reviewers compared the superhero comic Ultra to the television series Sex and the City? ... that the recently named fossil egg Suchoolithus dates to the Late Jurassic, making it tied for the oldest-known crocodylomorph egg? ... that the film The Brainwashing of My Dad received funding from Kickstarter? ... that the term elastance, the inverse of capacitance, was coined by Oliver Heaviside to promote an analogy of a capacitor as a spring rather than a container of charge? ... that "Christ ist erstanden", an old German hymn mentioned as early as the 12th century, was set for choir in the 21st century? ... that despite topping his class at Sandhurst, John Gellibrand found the prospects for promotion in the British Army so bleak that he resigned his commission and moved to Tasmania to grow apples? Recent additions Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru In the London Marathon, Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru (pictured) win the women's and men's races, respectively. A Taliban attack on an Afghan National Army base kills 140 soldiers. Turkey votes in a constitutional referendum in favour of replacing its parliamentary system of government with an executive presidency. A suicide bombing of civilian evacuation buses near Aleppo, Syria, kills more than 120 people, including at least 80 children. Emma Morano, the last known living person born before 1900, dies at the age of 117. Ongoing: Battle of Mosul Recent deaths: Erin Moran Michele Scarponi Ugo Ehiogu Aaron Hernandez On this day... April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries Today's featured picture The Storm is a painting by French artist Pierre Auguste Cot completed in 1880. Currently on display at New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art, it was commissioned by Catharine Lorillard Wolfe. Suggested inspirations have included the Greek romance Daphnis and Chloe by Longus as well as the romantic tale Paul et Virginie by Bernardin de Saint-Pierre. Painting: Pierre Auguste Cot Recently featured: Charolais bull Jesse B. Jackson Dynjandi Archive More featured pictures... Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning materials and activities Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 5,393,689 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=762066868" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Main Page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Languages ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Galego ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Român? ??????? Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? This page was last modified on 26 January 2017, at 12:39. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page#mw-head |||Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 5,393,689 articles in English Arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From today's featured article Stephen Breyer Heffernan v. City of Paterson was a U.S. Supreme Court case concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees, decided on April 26, 2016. Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey, police force, was seen with a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor. Heffernan's supervisors mistakenly thought that he was actively supporting the challenger and demoted him. He brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his right to free speech. Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer (pictured) cited the Court's precedents, which had held that it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not actually engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed but not that his constitutional rights had been violated. (Full article...) Recently featured: George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore "The Shape of Things to Come" (Lost) Shakespeare authorship question Archive By email More featured articles... Did you know... Unita Blackwell ... that civil rights activist Unita Blackwell (pictured) was the first African-American woman to be elected mayor in the state of Mississippi? ... that soldiers lined up on the sinking British troopship SS Tyndareus began to sing "It's a Long Way to Tipperary" while waiting for orders? ... that many reviewers compared the superhero comic Ultra to the television series Sex and the City? ... that the recently named fossil egg Suchoolithus dates to the Late Jurassic, making it tied for the oldest-known crocodylomorph egg? ... that the film The Brainwashing of My Dad received funding from Kickstarter? ... that the term elastance, the inverse of capacitance, was coined by Oliver Heaviside to promote an analogy of a capacitor as a spring rather than a container of charge? ... that "Christ ist erstanden", an old German hymn mentioned as early as the 12th century, was set for choir in the 21st century? ... that despite topping his class at Sandhurst, John Gellibrand found the prospects for promotion in the British Army so bleak that he resigned his commission and moved to Tasmania to grow apples? Recent additions Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru In the London Marathon, Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru (pictured) win the women's and men's races, respectively. A Taliban attack on an Afghan National Army base kills 140 soldiers. Turkey votes in a constitutional referendum in favour of replacing its parliamentary system of government with an executive presidency. A suicide bombing of civilian evacuation buses near Aleppo, Syria, kills more than 120 people, including at least 80 children. Emma Morano, the last known living person born before 1900, dies at the age of 117. Ongoing: Battle of Mosul Recent deaths: Erin Moran Michele Scarponi Ugo Ehiogu Aaron Hernandez On this day... April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries Today's featured picture The Storm is a painting by French artist Pierre Auguste Cot completed in 1880. Currently on display at New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art, it was commissioned by Catharine Lorillard Wolfe. Suggested inspirations have included the Greek romance Daphnis and Chloe by Longus as well as the romantic tale Paul et Virginie by Bernardin de Saint-Pierre. Painting: Pierre Auguste Cot Recently featured: Charolais bull Jesse B. Jackson Dynjandi Archive More featured pictures... Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning materials and activities Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 5,393,689 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=762066868" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Main Page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Languages ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Galego ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Român? ??????? Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? This page was last modified on 26 January 2017, at 12:39. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page#p-search |||Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 5,393,689 articles in English Arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From today's featured article Stephen Breyer Heffernan v. City of Paterson was a U.S. Supreme Court case concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees, decided on April 26, 2016. Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey, police force, was seen with a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor. Heffernan's supervisors mistakenly thought that he was actively supporting the challenger and demoted him. He brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his right to free speech. Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer (pictured) cited the Court's precedents, which had held that it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not actually engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed but not that his constitutional rights had been violated. (Full article...) Recently featured: George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore "The Shape of Things to Come" (Lost) Shakespeare authorship question Archive By email More featured articles... Did you know... Unita Blackwell ... that civil rights activist Unita Blackwell (pictured) was the first African-American woman to be elected mayor in the state of Mississippi? ... that soldiers lined up on the sinking British troopship SS Tyndareus began to sing "It's a Long Way to Tipperary" while waiting for orders? ... that many reviewers compared the superhero comic Ultra to the television series Sex and the City? ... that the recently named fossil egg Suchoolithus dates to the Late Jurassic, making it tied for the oldest-known crocodylomorph egg? ... that the film The Brainwashing of My Dad received funding from Kickstarter? ... that the term elastance, the inverse of capacitance, was coined by Oliver Heaviside to promote an analogy of a capacitor as a spring rather than a container of charge? ... that "Christ ist erstanden", an old German hymn mentioned as early as the 12th century, was set for choir in the 21st century? ... that despite topping his class at Sandhurst, John Gellibrand found the prospects for promotion in the British Army so bleak that he resigned his commission and moved to Tasmania to grow apples? Recent additions Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru In the London Marathon, Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru (pictured) win the women's and men's races, respectively. A Taliban attack on an Afghan National Army base kills 140 soldiers. Turkey votes in a constitutional referendum in favour of replacing its parliamentary system of government with an executive presidency. A suicide bombing of civilian evacuation buses near Aleppo, Syria, kills more than 120 people, including at least 80 children. Emma Morano, the last known living person born before 1900, dies at the age of 117. Ongoing: Battle of Mosul Recent deaths: Erin Moran Michele Scarponi Ugo Ehiogu Aaron Hernandez On this day... April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries Today's featured picture The Storm is a painting by French artist Pierre Auguste Cot completed in 1880. Currently on display at New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art, it was commissioned by Catharine Lorillard Wolfe. Suggested inspirations have included the Greek romance Daphnis and Chloe by Longus as well as the romantic tale Paul et Virginie by Bernardin de Saint-Pierre. Painting: Pierre Auguste Cot Recently featured: Charolais bull Jesse B. Jackson Dynjandi Archive More featured pictures... Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning materials and activities Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 5,393,689 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=762066868" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Main Page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Languages ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Galego ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Român? ??????? Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? This page was last modified on 26 January 2017, at 12:39. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia |||Wikipedia From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article is about the Internet encyclopedia. For Wikipedia's home page, see Wikipedia's Main Page. For Wikipedia's visitor introduction, see Wikipedia's About Page. For other uses, see Wikipedia (disambiguation). Wikipedia The logo of Wikipedia, a globe featuring glyphs from several writing systems[notes 1] Screenshot  Main Page of the English Wikipedia on April 6, 2017 Type of site Internet encyclopedia Available in 295 languages Owner Wikimedia Foundation Created by Jimmy Wales, Larry Sanger[1] Slogan(s) The free encyclopedia that anyone can edit Website wikipedia.org Alexa rank 5 (Global, April 2017[update]) Commercial No Registration Optional[notes 2] Users >312,808 active users[notes 3] and >67,527,543 registered users Launched January 15, 2001; 16 years ago (2001-01-15) Current status Active Content license CC Attribution / Share-Alike 3.0 Most text is also dual-licensed under GFDL; media licensing varies Written in LAMP platform[2] OCLC number 52075003 Wikipedia (i/?w?k??pi?di?/ or i/?w?ki?pi?di?/ WIK-i-PEE-dee-?) is a free online encyclopedia with the aim to allow anyone to edit articles.[3] Wikipedia is the largest and most popular general reference work on the Internet[4][5][6] and is ranked among the ten most popular websites.[7] Wikipedia is owned by the nonprofit Wikimedia Foundation.[8][9][10] Wikipedia was launched on January 15, 2001, by Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger.[11] Sanger coined its name,[12][13] a portmanteau of wiki[notes 4] and encyclopedia. There was only the English language version initially, but it quickly developed similar versions in other languages, which differ in content and in editing practices. With 5,393,611 articles,[notes 5] the English Wikipedia is the largest of the more than 290 Wikipedia encyclopedias. Overall, Wikipedia consists of more than 40 million articles in more than 250 different languages[15] and, as of February 2014[update], it had 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors each month.[16] As of March 2017, Wikipedia has about forty thousand high-quality articles known as Featured Articles and Good Articles that cover vital topics.[17][18] In 2005, Nature published a peer review comparing 42 science articles from Encyclopædia Britannica and Wikipedia, and found that Wikipedia's level of accuracy approached Encyclopædia Britannica's.[19] Criticism of Wikipedia includes claims that it exhibits systemic bias, presents a mixture of "truths, half truths, and some falsehoods",[20] and that, in controversial topics, it is subject to manipulation and spin.[21] Contents 1 History 1.1 Nupedia 1.2 Launch and early growth 1.3 Milestones 2 Openness 2.1 Restrictions 2.2 Review of changes 2.3 Vandalism 3 Policies and laws 3.1 Content policies and guidelines 4 Governance 4.1 Administrators 4.2 Dispute resolution 4.2.1 Arbitration Committee 5 Community 5.1 Diversity 6 Language editions 7 Critical reception 7.1 Accuracy of content 7.1.1 Medical information 7.2 Quality of writing 7.3 Coverage of topics and systemic bias 7.3.1 Coverage of topics and selection bias 7.3.2 Systemic bias 7.3.3 Identifying the filter-bubble problem 7.4 Explicit content 7.5 Privacy 7.6 Sexism 8 Operation 8.1 Wikimedia Foundation and Wikimedia movement affiliates 8.2 Software operations and support 8.3 Automated editing 8.4 Wikiprojects, and assessments of articles' importance and quality 8.5 Hardware operations and support 8.6 Internal research and operational development 8.7 Internal news publications 9 Access to content 9.1 Content licensing 9.2 Methods of access 9.2.1 Mobile access 10 Cultural impact 10.1 Readership 10.2 Cultural significance 10.2.1 Awards 10.2.2 Satire 10.3 Sister projects – Wikimedia 10.4 Publishing 10.5 Scientific use 11 Related projects 12 See also 13 References 13.1 Notes 14 Further reading 14.1 Academic studies 14.2 Books 14.3 Book reviews and other articles 14.3.1 Learning resources 14.3.2 Other media coverage 15 External links History Main article: History of Wikipedia Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger Nupedia Wikipedia originally developed from another encyclopedia project called Nupedia Other collaborative online encyclopedias were attempted before Wikipedia, but none were so successful.[22] Wikipedia began as a complementary project for Nupedia, a free online English-language encyclopedia project whose articles were written by experts and reviewed under a formal process.[11] Nupedia was founded on March 9, 2000, under the ownership of Bomis, a web portal company. Its main figures were Jimmy Wales, the CEO of Bomis, and Larry Sanger, editor-in-chief for Nupedia and later Wikipedia. Nupedia was licensed initially under its own Nupedia Open Content License, switching to the GNU Free Documentation License before Wikipedia's founding at the urging of Richard Stallman.[23] Sanger and Wales founded Wikipedia.[24][25] While Wales is credited with defining the goal of making a publicly editable encyclopedia,[26][27] Sanger is credited with the strategy of using a wiki to reach that goal.[28] On January 10, 2001, Sanger proposed on the Nupedia mailing list to create a wiki as a "feeder" project for Nupedia.[29] Play media Wikipedia according to Simpleshow External audio The Great Book of Knowledge, Part 1, Ideas with Paul Kennedy, CBC, January 15, 2014 Launch and early growth Wikipedia was launched on January 15, 2001, as a single English-language edition at www.wikipedia.com,[30] and announced by Sanger on the Nupedia mailing list.[26] Wikipedia's policy of "neutral point-of-view"[31] was codified in its first months. Otherwise, there were relatively few rules initially and Wikipedia operated independently of Nupedia.[26] Originally, Bomis intended to make Wikipedia a business for profit.[32] Wikipedia gained early contributors from Nupedia, Slashdot postings, and web search engine indexing. By August 8, 2001, Wikipedia had over 8,000 articles.[33] On September 25, 2001, Wikipedia had over 13,000 articles.[34] By the end of 2001, it had grown to approximately 20,000 articles and 18 language editions. It had reached 26 language editions by late 2002, 46 by the end of 2003, and 161 by the final days of 2004.[35] Nupedia and Wikipedia coexisted until the former's servers were taken down permanently in 2003, and its text was incorporated into Wikipedia. The English Wikipedia passed the mark of two million articles on September 9, 2007, making it the largest encyclopedia ever assembled, surpassing even the 1408 Yongle Encyclopedia, which had held the record for almost 600 years.[36] Citing fears of commercial advertising and lack of control in Wikipedia, users of the Spanish Wikipedia forked from Wikipedia to create the Enciclopedia Libre in February 2002.[37] These moves encouraged Wales to announce that Wikipedia would not display advertisements, and to change Wikipedia's domain from wikipedia.com to wikipedia.org.[38] Though the English Wikipedia reached three million articles in August 2009, the growth of the edition, in terms of the numbers of articles and of contributors, appears to have peaked around early 2007.[39] Around 1,800 articles were added daily to the encyclopedia in 2006; by 2013 that average was roughly 800.[40] A team at the Palo Alto Research Center attributed this slowing of growth to the project's increasing exclusivity and resistance to change.[41] Others suggest that the growth is flattening naturally because articles that could be called "low-hanging fruit"—topics that clearly merit an article—have already been created and built up extensively.[42][43][44] In November 2009, a researcher at the Rey Juan Carlos University in Madrid (Spain) found that the English Wikipedia had lost 49,000 editors during the first three months of 2009; in comparison, the project lost only 4,900 editors during the same period in 2008.[45][46] The Wall Street Journal cited the array of rules applied to editing and disputes related to such content among the reasons for this trend.[47] Wales disputed these claims in 2009, denying the decline and questioning the methodology of the study.[48] Two years later, in 2011, Wales acknowledged the presence of a slight decline, noting a decrease from "a little more than 36,000 writers" in June 2010 to 35,800 in June 2011. In the same interview, Wales also claimed the number of editors was "stable and sustainable".[49] A 2013 article titled "The Decline of Wikipedia" in MIT's Technology Review questioned this claim. The article revealed that since 2007, Wikipedia had lost a third of the volunteer editors who update and correct the online encyclopedia and those still there have focused increasingly on minutiae.[50] In July 2012, the Atlantic reported that the number of administrators is also in decline.[51] In the November 25, 2013, issue of New York magazine, Katherine Ward stated "Wikipedia, the sixth-most-used website, is facing an internal crisis".[52] Wikipedia blackout protest against SOPA on January 18, 2012 Play media A promotional video of the Wikimedia Foundation that encourages viewers to edit Wikipedia, mostly reviewing 2014 via Wikipedia content Milestones In January 2007, Wikipedia entered for the first time the top-ten list of the most popular websites in the U.S., according to comScore Networks. With 42.9 million unique visitors, Wikipedia was ranked number 9, surpassing the New York Times (#10) and Apple (#11). This marked a significant increase over January 2006, when the rank was number 33, with Wikipedia receiving around 18.3 million unique visitors.[53] As of March 2015[update], Wikipedia has rank 5[7][54] among websites in terms of popularity according to Alexa Internet. In 2014, it received 8 billion pageviews every month.[55] On February 9, 2014, The New York Times reported that Wikipedia has 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors a month, "according to the ratings firm comScore."[16] On January 18, 2012, the English Wikipedia participated in a series of coordinated protests against two proposed laws in the United States Congress—the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA) and the PROTECT IP Act (PIPA)—by blacking out its pages for 24 hours.[56] More than 162 million people viewed the blackout explanation page that temporarily replaced Wikipedia content.[57][58] Loveland and Reagle argue that, in process, Wikipedia follows a long tradition of historical encyclopedias that accumulated improvements piecemeal through "stigmergic accumulation".[59][60] On January 20, 2014, Subodh Varma reporting for The Economic Times indicated that not only had Wikipedia's growth flattened but that it has "lost nearly 10 per cent of its page-views last year. That's a decline of about 2 billion between December 2012 and December 2013. Its most popular versions are leading the slide: page-views of the English Wikipedia declined by 12 per cent, those of German version slid by 17 per cent and the Japanese version lost 9 per cent."[61] Varma added that, "While Wikipedia's managers think that this could be due to errors in counting, other experts feel that Google's Knowledge Graphs project launched last year may be gobbling up Wikipedia users."[61] When contacted on this matter, Clay Shirky, associate professor at New York University and fellow at Harvard's Berkman Center for Internet and Security indicated that he suspected much of the page view decline was due to Knowledge Graphs, stating, "If you can get your question answered from the search page, you don't need to click [any further]."[61] By the end of December 2016, Wikipedia was ranked fifth in the most popular websites globally.[62] Number of Wikipedia articles[63] Wikipedia editors with >100 edits per month[63] Openness Differences between versions of an article are highlighted as shown Unlike traditional encyclopedias, Wikipedia follows the procrastination principle[notes 6][64] regarding the security of its content.[64] It started almost entirely open—anyone could create articles, and any Wikipedia article could be edited by any reader, even those who did not have a Wikipedia account. Modifications to all articles would be published immediately. As a result, any article could contain inaccuracies such as errors, ideological biases, and nonsensical or irrelevant text. Restrictions Due to the increasing popularity of Wikipedia, popular editions, including the English version, have introduced editing restrictions in some cases. For instance, on the English Wikipedia and some other language editions, only registered users may create a new article.[65] On the English Wikipedia, among others, some particularly controversial, sensitive and/or vandalism-prone pages have been protected to some degree.[66][67] A frequently vandalized article can be semi-protected or extended confirmed protected, meaning that only autoconfirmed or extended confirmed editors are able to modify it.[68] A particularly contentious article may be locked so that only administrators are able to make changes.[69] In certain cases, all editors are allowed to submit modifications, but review is required for some editors, depending on certain conditions. For example, the German Wikipedia maintains "stable versions" of articles,[70] which have passed certain reviews. Following protracted trials and community discussion, the English Wikipedia introduced the "pending changes" system in December 2012.[71] Under this system, new and unregistered users' edits to certain controversial or vandalism-prone articles are reviewed by established users before they are published.[72] The editing interface of Wikipedia Review of changes Although changes are not systematically reviewed, the software that powers Wikipedia provides certain tools allowing anyone to review changes made by others. The "History" page of each article links to each revision.[notes 7][73] On most articles, anyone can undo others' changes by clicking a link on the article's history page. Anyone can view the latest changes to articles, and anyone may maintain a "watchlist" of articles that interest them so they can be notified of any changes. "New pages patrol" is a process whereby newly created articles are checked for obvious problems.[74] In 2003, economics PhD student Andrea Ciffolilli argued that the low transaction costs of participating in a wiki create a catalyst for collaborative development, and that features such as allowing easy access to past versions of a page favor "creative construction" over "creative destruction".[75] Vandalism Main article: Vandalism on Wikipedia Any change or edit that manipulates content in a way that purposefully compromises the integrity of Wikipedia is considered vandalism. The most common and obvious types of vandalism include additions of obscenities and crude humor. Vandalism can also include advertising and other types of spam.[76] Sometimes editors commit vandalism by removing content or entirely blanking a given page. Less common types of vandalism, such as the deliberate addition of plausible but false information to an article, can be more difficult to detect. Vandals can introduce irrelevant formatting, modify page semantics such as the page's title or categorization, manipulate the underlying code of an article, or use images disruptively.[77] American journalist John Seigenthaler (1927–2014), subject of the Seigenthaler incident Obvious vandalism is generally easy to remove from Wikipedia articles; the median time to detect and fix vandalism is a few minutes.[78][79] However, some vandalism takes much longer to repair.[80] In the Seigenthaler biography incident, an anonymous editor introduced false information into the biography of American political figure John Seigenthaler in May 2005. Seigenthaler was falsely presented as a suspect in the assassination of John F. Kennedy.[80] The article remained uncorrected for four months.[80] Seigenthaler, the founding editorial director of USA Today and founder of the Freedom Forum First Amendment Center at Vanderbilt University, called Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales and asked whether he had any way of knowing who contributed the misinformation. Wales replied that he did not, although the perpetrator was eventually traced.[81][82] After the incident, Seigenthaler described Wikipedia as "a flawed and irresponsible research tool".[80] This incident led to policy changes at Wikipedia, specifically targeted at tightening up the verifiability of biographical articles of living people.[83] Policies and laws See also: Wikipedia:Five Pillars External video Wikimania, 60 Minutes, CBS, 20 minutes, April 5, 2015, co-founder Jimmy Wales at Fosdem Content in Wikipedia is subject to the laws (in particular, copyright laws) of the United States and of the U.S. state of Virginia, where the majority of Wikipedia's servers are located. Beyond legal matters, the editorial principles of Wikipedia are embodied in the "five pillars" and in numerous policies and guidelines intended to appropriately shape content. Even these rules are stored in wiki form, and Wikipedia editors write and revise the website's policies and guidelines.[84] Editors can enforce these rules by deleting or modifying non-compliant material. Originally, rules on the non-English editions of Wikipedia were based on a translation of the rules for the English Wikipedia. They have since diverged to some extent.[70] Content policies and guidelines According to the rules on the English Wikipedia, each entry in Wikipedia must be about a topic that is encyclopedic and is not a dictionary entry or dictionary-like.[85] A topic should also meet Wikipedia's standards of "notability",[86] which generally means that the topic must have been covered in mainstream media or major academic journal sources that are independent of the article's subject. Further, Wikipedia intends to convey only knowledge that is already established and recognized.[87] It must not present original research. A claim that is likely to be challenged requires a reference to a reliable source. Among Wikipedia editors, this is often phrased as "verifiability, not truth" to express the idea that the readers, not the encyclopedia, are ultimately responsible for checking the truthfulness of the articles and making their own interpretations.[88] This can at times lead to the removal of information that is valid.[89] Finally, Wikipedia must not take sides.[90] All opinions and viewpoints, if attributable to external sources, must enjoy an appropriate share of coverage within an article.[91] This is known as neutral point of view (NPOV). Governance Further information: Wikipedia:Administration Wikipedia's initial anarchy integrated democratic and hierarchical elements over time.[92][93] An article is not considered to be owned by its creator or any other editor and is not vetted by any recognized authority.[94] Wikipedia's contributors avoid a tragedy of the commons by internalizing benefits. They do this by experiencing flow and identifying with and gaining status in the Wikipedia community.[95] Administrators Editors in good standing in the community can run for one of many levels of volunteer stewardship: this begins with "administrator",[96][97] privileged users who can delete pages, prevent articles from being changed in case of vandalism or editorial disputes, and try to prevent certain persons from editing. Despite the name, administrators are not supposed to enjoy any special privilege in decision-making; instead, their powers are mostly limited to making edits that have project-wide effects and thus are disallowed to ordinary editors, and to implement restrictions intended to prevent certain persons from making disruptive edits (such as vandalism).[98][99] Fewer editors become administrators than in years past, in part because the process of vetting potential Wikipedia administrators has become more rigorous.[100] Bureaucrats name new administrators, solely upon the recommendations from the community. Dispute resolution Wikipedians often have disputes regarding content, which may result in repeatedly making opposite changes to an article, known as edit warring[101][102] Over time, Wikipedia has developed a semi-formal dispute resolution process to assist in such circumstances. In order to determine community consensus, editors can raise issues at appropriate community forums,[notes 8] or seek outside input through third opinion requests or by initiating a more general community discussion known as a request for comment. Arbitration Committee Main article: Arbitration Committee The Arbitration Committee presides over the ultimate dispute resolution process. Although disputes usually arise from a disagreement between two opposing views on how an article should read, the Arbitration Committee explicitly refuses to directly rule on the specific view that should be adopted. Statistical analyses suggest that the committee ignores the content of disputes and rather focuses on the way disputes are conducted,[103] functioning not so much to resolve disputes and make peace between conflicting editors, but to weed out problematic editors while allowing potentially productive editors back in to participate. Therefore, the committee does not dictate the content of articles, although it sometimes condemns content changes when it deems the new content violates Wikipedia policies (for example, if the new content is considered biased). Its remedies include cautions and probations (used in 63% of cases) and banning editors from articles (43%), subject matters (23%) or Wikipedia (16%). Complete bans from Wikipedia are generally limited to instances of impersonation and anti-social behavior. When conduct is not impersonation or anti-social, but rather anti-consensus or in violation of editing policies, remedies tend to be limited to warnings.[104] Community Main article: Wikipedia community Play media Video of Wikimania 2005 – an annual conference for users of Wikipedia and other projects operated by the Wikimedia Foundation, was held in Frankfurt am Main, Germany from August 4 to 8. Each article and each user of Wikipedia has an associated "Talk" page. These form the primary communication channel for editors to discuss, coordinate and debate.[105] Play media Wikipedians and British Museum curators collaborate on the article Hoxne Hoard in June 2010 Wikipedia's community has been described as cult-like,[106] although not always with entirely negative connotations.[107] The project's preference for cohesiveness, even if it requires compromise that includes disregard of credentials, has been referred to as "anti-elitism".[108] Wikipedians sometimes award one another virtual barnstars for good work. These personalized tokens of appreciation reveal a wide range of valued work extending far beyond simple editing to include social support, administrative actions, and types of articulation work.[109] Wikipedia does not require that its editors and contributors provide identification.[110] As Wikipedia grew, "Who writes Wikipedia?" became one of the questions frequently asked on the project.[111] Jimmy Wales once argued that only "a community ... a dedicated group of a few hundred volunteers" makes the bulk of contributions to Wikipedia and that the project is therefore "much like any traditional organization".[112] In 2008, a Slate magazine article reported that: "According to researchers in Palo Alto, 1 percent of Wikipedia users are responsible for about half of the site's edits."[113] This method of evaluating contributions was later disputed by Aaron Swartz, who noted that several articles he sampled had large portions of their content (measured by number of characters) contributed by users with low edit counts.[114] The English Wikipedia has 5,393,611 articles, 30,795,277 registered editors, and 135,691 active editors. An editor is considered active if they have made one or more edits in the past thirty days. Editors who fail to comply with Wikipedia cultural rituals, such as signing talk page comments, may implicitly signal that they are Wikipedia outsiders, increasing the odds that Wikipedia insiders may target or discount their contributions. Becoming a Wikipedia insider involves non-trivial costs: the contributor is expected to learn Wikipedia-specific technological codes, submit to a sometimes convoluted dispute resolution process, and learn a "baffling culture rich with in-jokes and insider references".[115] Editors who do not log in are in some sense second-class citizens on Wikipedia,[115] as "participants are accredited by members of the wiki community, who have a vested interest in preserving the quality of the work product, on the basis of their ongoing participation",[116] but the contribution histories of anonymous unregistered editors recognized only by their IP addresses cannot be attributed to a particular editor with certainty. A 2007 study by researchers from Dartmouth College found that "anonymous and infrequent contributors to Wikipedia […] are as reliable a source of knowledge as those contributors who register with the site".[117] Jimmy Wales stated in 2009 that "(I)t turns out over 50% of all the edits are done by just .7% of the users... 524 people... And in fact the most active 2%, which is 1400 people, have done 73.4% of all the edits."[112] However, Business Insider editor and journalist Henry Blodget showed in 2009 that in a random sample of articles, most content in Wikipedia (measured by the amount of contributed text that survives to the latest sampled edit) is created by "outsiders", while most editing and formatting is done by "insiders".[112] A 2008 study found that Wikipedians were less agreeable, open, and conscientious than others,[118][119] although a later commentary pointed out serious flaws, including that the data showed higher openness, that the differences with the control group were small as were the samples.[120] According to a 2009 study, there is "evidence of growing resistance from the Wikipedia community to new content".[121] Diversity Wikipedia editor demographics (2008) One study found that the contributor base to Wikipedia "was barely 13% women; the average age of a contributor was in the mid-20s".[122] A 2011 study by researchers from the University of Minnesota found that females comprised 16.1% of the 38,497 editors who started editing Wikipedia during 2009.[123] In a January 2011 New York Times article, Noam Cohen observed that just 13% of Wikipedia's contributors are female according to a 2008 Wikimedia Foundation survey.[124] Sue Gardner, a former executive director of the Wikimedia Foundation, hoped to see female contributions increase to 25% by 2015.[125] Linda Basch, president of the National Council for Research on Women, noted the contrast in these Wikipedia editor statistics with the percentage of women currently completing bachelor's degrees, master's degrees and PhD programs in the United States (all at rates of 50 percent or greater).[126] In response, various universities have hosted edit-a-thons to encourage more women to participate in the Wikipedia community. In fall 2013, 15 colleges and universities — including Yale, Brown, and Pennsylvania State — offered college credit for students to "write feminist thinking" about technology into Wikipedia.[127] Estimates of the diversity of contributors by educational level have indicated that sixty-two percent of Wikipedia's editors are at the high school and undergraduate college level of education.[128] In August 2014, Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales said in a BBC interview that the Wikimedia Foundation was "... really doubling down our efforts ..." to reach 25% of female editors (originally targeted by 2015), since the Foundation had "totally failed" so far. Wales said "a lot of things need to happen ... a lot of outreach, a lot of software changes".[129] Andrew Lih, writing in The New York Times, was quoted by Bloomberg News in December 2016 as supporting Wales comments concerning shortfalls in Wikipedia's outreach to female editors. Lih states his concern with the question indicating that: "How can you get people to participate in an (editing) environment that feels unsafe, where identifying yourself as a woman, as a feminist, could open you up to ugly, intimidating behavior".[130] Language editions There are currently 295 language editions of Wikipedia (also called language versions, or simply Wikipedias). Thirteen of these have over one million articles each (English, Swedish, Cebuano, German, Dutch, French, Russian, Italian, Spanish, Waray-Waray, Polish, Vietnamese and Japanese), five more have over 500,000 articles (Portuguese, Chinese, Ukrainian, Catalan and Persian), 40 more have over 100,000 articles, and 77 more have over 10,000 articles.[131][132] The largest, the English Wikipedia, has over 5.3 million articles. As of January 2017[update], according to Alexa, the English subdomain (en.wikipedia.org; English Wikipedia) receives approximately 55% of Wikipedia's cumulative traffic, with the remaining split among the other languages (Russian: 9%; Japanese: 7%; Spanish: 6%; French: 4%).[7] As of April 2017, the six largest language editions are (in order of article count) the English, Cebuano, Swedish, German, Dutch, and French Wikipedias.[133] Distribution of the 44,160,825 articles in different language editions (as of 26 April 2017)[134]   English (12.2%)   Cebuano (9.4%)   Swedish (8.6%)   German (4.6%)   Dutch (4.3%)   French (4.2%)   Russian (3.1%)   Italian (3%)   Spanish (3%)   Waray (2.9%)   Polish (2.8%)   Vietnamese (2.6%)   Japanese (2.4%)   Portuguese (2.2%)   Other (34.7%) Logarithmic graph of the 20 largest language editions of Wikipedia (as of 26 April 2017)[135] (millions of articles) 0.1 0.3 1 3 English 5,393,611 Cebuano 4,138,135 Swedish 3,785,049 German 2,048,714 Dutch 1,897,908 French 1,858,259 Russian 1,384,908 Italian 1,346,331 Spanish 1,327,066 Waray 1,262,379 Polish 1,215,642 Vietnamese 1,155,136 Japanese 1,055,534 Portuguese 964,262 Chinese 934,268 Ukrainian 688,922 Catalan 538,744 Persian 526,845 Arabic 513,311 Norwegian 464,789 The unit for the numbers in bars is articles. Since Wikipedia is based on the Web and therefore worldwide, contributors to the same language edition may use different dialects or may come from different countries (as is the case for the English edition). These differences may lead to some conflicts over spelling differences (e.g. colour versus color)[136] or points of view.[137] Though the various language editions are held to global policies such as "neutral point of view", they diverge on some points of policy and practice, most notably on whether images that are not licensed freely may be used under a claim of fair use.[138][139][140] Jimmy Wales has described Wikipedia as "an effort to create and distribute a free encyclopedia of the highest possible quality to every single person on the planet in their own language".[141] Though each language edition functions more or less independently, some efforts are made to supervise them all. They are coordinated in part by Meta-Wiki, the Wikimedia Foundation's wiki devoted to maintaining all of its projects (Wikipedia and others).[142] For instance, Meta-Wiki provides important statistics on all language editions of Wikipedia,[143] and it maintains a list of articles every Wikipedia should have.[144] The list concerns basic content by subject: biography, history, geography, society, culture, science, technology, and mathematics. As for the rest, it is not rare for articles strongly related to a particular language not to have counterparts in another edition. For example, articles about small towns in the United States might only be available in English, even when they meet notability criteria of other language Wikipedia projects. Estimation of contributions shares from different regions in the world to different Wikipedia editions Translated articles represent only a small portion of articles in most editions, in part because fully automated translation of articles is disallowed.[145] Articles available in more than one language may offer "interwiki links", which link to the counterpart articles in other editions. A study published by PLOS ONE in 2012 also estimated the share of contributions to different editions of Wikipedia from different regions of the world. It reported that the proportion of the edits made from North America was 51% for the English Wikipedia, and 25% for the simple English Wikipedia.[146] The Wikimedia Foundation hopes to increase the number of editors in the Global South to thirty-seven percent by 2015.[147] On March 1, 2014, The Economist in an article titled "The Future of Wikipedia" cited a trend analysis concerning data published by Wikimedia stating that: "The number of editors for the English-language version has fallen by a third in seven years."[148] The attrition rate for active editors in English Wikipedia was cited by The Economist as substantially in contrast to statistics for Wikipedia in other languages (non-English Wikipedia). The Economist reported that the number of contributors with an average of five of more edits per month was relatively constant since 2008 for Wikipedia in other languages at approximately 42,000 editors within narrow seasonal variances of about 2,000 editors up or down. The attrition rates for editors in English Wikipedia, by sharp comparison, were cited as peaking in 2007 at approximately 50,000 editors which has dropped to 30,000 editors as of the start of 2014. At the quoted trend rate, the number of active editors in English Wikipedia has lost approximately 20,000 editors to attrition since 2007, and the documented trend rate indicates the loss of another 20,000 editors by 2021, down to 10,000 active editors on English Wikipedia by 2021 if left unabated.[148] Given that the trend analysis published in The Economist presents the number of active editors for Wikipedia in other languages (non-English Wikipedia) as remaining relatively constant and successful in sustaining its numbers at approximately 42,000 active editors, the contrast has pointed to the effectiveness of Wikipedia in other languages to retain its active editors on a renewable and sustained basis.[148] No comment was made concerning which of the differentiated edit policy standards from Wikipedia in other languages (non-English Wikipedia) would provide a possible alternative to English Wikipedia for effectively ameliorating substantial editor attrition rates on the English language Wikipedia.[149] Critical reception See also: Academic studies about Wikipedia and Criticism of Wikipedia Several Wikipedians have criticized Wikipedia's large and growing regulation, which includes over 50 policies and nearly 150,000 words as of 2014[update].[150][151] Critics have stated that Wikipedia exhibits systemic bias. Columnist and journalist Edwin Black criticizes Wikipedia for being a mixture of "truth, half truth, and some falsehoods".[20] Articles in The Chronicle of Higher Education and The Journal of Academic Librarianship have criticized Wikipedia's Undue Weight policy, concluding that the fact that Wikipedia explicitly is not designed to provide correct information about a subject, but rather focus on all the major viewpoints on the subject and give less attention to minor ones, creates omissions that can lead to false beliefs based on incomplete information.[152][153][154] Journalists Oliver Kamm and Edwin Black noted how articles are dominated by the loudest and most persistent voices, usually by a group with an "ax to grind" on the topic.[20][155] An article in Education Next Journal concluded that as a resource about controversial topics, Wikipedia is notoriously subject to manipulation and spin.[21] In 2006, the Wikipedia Watch criticism website listed dozens of examples of plagiarism in the English Wikipedia.[156] Accuracy of content Main article: Reliability of Wikipedia Articles for traditional encyclopedias such as Encyclopædia Britannica are carefully and deliberately written by experts, lending such encyclopedias a reputation for accuracy.[157] Conversely, Wikipedia is often cited for factual inaccuracies and misrepresentations. However, a peer review in 2005 of forty-two scientific entries on both Wikipedia and Encyclopædia Britannica by the science journal Nature found few differences in accuracy, and concluded that "the average science entry in Wikipedia contained around four inaccuracies; Britannica, about three."[19] Reagle suggested that while the study reflects "a topical strength of Wikipedia contributors" in science articles, "Wikipedia may not have fared so well using a random sampling of articles or on humanities subjects."[158] The findings by Nature were disputed by Encyclopædia Britannica,[159][160] and in response, Nature gave a rebuttal of the points raised by Britannica.[161] In addition to the point-for-point disagreement between these two parties, others have examined the sample size and selection method used in the Nature effort, and suggested a "flawed study design" (in Nature's manual selection of articles, in part or in whole, for comparison), absence of statistical analysis (e.g., of reported confidence intervals), and a lack of study "statistical power" (i.e., owing to small sample size, 42 or 4 x 101 articles compared, vs >105 and >106 set sizes for Britannica and the English Wikipedia, respectively).[162] As a consequence of the open structure, Wikipedia "makes no guarantee of validity" of its content, since no one is ultimately responsible for any claims appearing in it.[163] Concerns have been raised by PC World in 2009 regarding the lack of accountability that results from users' anonymity,[164] the insertion of false information,[165] vandalism, and similar problems. Economist Tyler Cowen wrote: "If I had to guess whether Wikipedia or the median refereed journal article on economics was more likely to be true, after a not so long think I would opt for Wikipedia." He comments that some traditional sources of non-fiction suffer from systemic biases and novel results, in his opinion, are over-reported in journal articles and relevant information is omitted from news reports. However, he also cautions that errors are frequently found on Internet sites, and that academics and experts must be vigilant in correcting them.[166] Critics argue that Wikipedia's open nature and a lack of proper sources for most of the information makes it unreliable.[167] Some commentators suggest that Wikipedia may be reliable, but that the reliability of any given article is not clear.[168] Editors of traditional reference works such as the Encyclopædia Britannica have questioned the project's utility and status as an encyclopedia.[169] External video Inside Wikipedia – Attack of the PR Industry, Deutsche Welle, 7:13 mins[170] Wikipedia's open structure inherently makes it an easy target for Internet trolls, spammers, and various forms of paid advocacy seen as counterproductive to the maintenance of a neutral and verifiable online encyclopedia.[73][171] In response to paid advocacy editing and undisclosed editing issues, Wikipedia was reported in an article by Jeff Elder in The Wall Street Journal on June 16, 2014, to have strengthened its rules and laws against undisclosed editing.[172] The article stated that: "Beginning Monday [from date of article], changes in Wikipedia's terms of use will require anyone paid to edit articles to disclose that arrangement. Katherine Maher, the nonprofit Wikimedia Foundation's chief communications officer, said the changes address a sentiment among volunteer editors that, 'we're not an advertising service; we're an encyclopedia.'"[172][173][174][175][176] These issues, among others, had been parodied since the first decade of Wikipedia, notably by Stephen Colbert on The Colbert Report.[177] Most university lecturers discourage students from citing any encyclopedia in academic work, preferring primary sources;[178] some specifically prohibit Wikipedia citations.[179][180] Wales stresses that encyclopedias of any type are not usually appropriate to use as citeable sources, and should not be relied upon as authoritative.[181] Wales once (2006 or earlier) said he receives about ten emails weekly from students saying they got failing grades on papers because they cited Wikipedia; he told the students they got what they deserved. "For God's sake, you're in college; don't cite the encyclopedia", he said.[182] In February 2007, an article in The Harvard Crimson newspaper reported that a few of the professors at Harvard University were including Wikipedia articles in their syllabi, although without realizing the articles might change.[183] In June 2007, former president of the American Library Association Michael Gorman condemned Wikipedia, along with Google,[184] stating that academics who endorse the use of Wikipedia are "the intellectual equivalent of a dietitian who recommends a steady diet of Big Macs with everything". A Harvard law textbook, Legal Research in a Nutshell (2011), cites Wikipedia as a "general source" that "can be a real boon" in "coming up to speed in the law governing a situation" and, "while not authoritative, can provide basic facts as well as leads to more in-depth resources".[185] Medical information See also: Health information on Wikipedia On March 5, 2014, Julie Beck writing for The Atlantic magazine in an article titled "Doctors' #1 Source for Healthcare Information: Wikipedia", stated that "Fifty percent of physicians look up conditions on the (Wikipedia) site, and some are editing articles themselves to improve the quality of available information."[186] Beck continued to detail in this article new programs of Dr. Amin Azzam at the University of San Francisco to offer medical school courses to medical students for learning to edit and improve Wikipedia articles on health-related issues, as well as internal quality control programs within Wikipedia organized by Dr. James Heilman to improve a group of 200 health-related articles of central medical importance up to Wikipedia's highest standard of articles using its Featured Article and Good Article peer review evaluation process.[186] In a May 7, 2014, follow-up article in The Atlantic titled "Can Wikipedia Ever Be a Definitive Medical Text?", Julie Beck quotes Wikiproject Medicine's Dr. James Heilman as stating: "Just because a reference is peer-reviewed doesn't mean it's a high-quality reference."[187] Beck added that: "Wikipedia has its own peer review process before articles can be classified as 'good' or 'featured.' Heilman, who has participated in that process before, says 'less than 1 percent' of Wikipedia's medical articles have passed.[187] Quality of writing In 2008, researchers at Carnegie Mellon University found that the quality of a Wikipedia article would suffer rather than gain from adding more writers when the article lacked appropriate explicit or implicit coordination.[188] For instance, when contributors rewrite small portions of an entry rather than making full-length revisions, high- and low-quality content may be intermingled within an entry. Roy Rosenzweig, a history professor, stated that American National Biography Online outperformed Wikipedia in terms of its "clear and engaging prose", which, he said, was an important aspect of good historical writing.[189] Contrasting Wikipedia's treatment of Abraham Lincoln to that of Civil War historian James McPherson in American National Biography Online, he said that both were essentially accurate and covered the major episodes in Lincoln's life, but praised "McPherson's richer contextualization […] his artful use of quotations to capture Lincoln's voice […] and […] his ability to convey a profound message in a handful of words." By contrast, he gives an example of Wikipedia's prose that he finds "both verbose and dull". Rosenzweig also criticized the "waffling—encouraged by the NPOV policy—[which] means that it is hard to discern any overall interpretive stance in Wikipedia history". By example, he quoted the conclusion of Wikipedia's article on William Clarke Quantrill. While generally praising the article, he pointed out its "waffling" conclusion: "Some historians […] remember him as an opportunistic, bloodthirsty outlaw, while others continue to view him as a daring soldier and local folk hero."[189] Other critics have made similar charges that, even if Wikipedia articles are factually accurate, they are often written in a poor, almost unreadable style. Frequent Wikipedia critic Andrew Orlowski commented: "Even when a Wikipedia entry is 100 per cent factually correct, and those facts have been carefully chosen, it all too often reads as if it has been translated from one language to another then into to a third, passing an illiterate translator at each stage."[190] A study of Wikipedia articles on cancer was conducted in 2010 by Yaacov Lawrence of the Kimmel Cancer Center at Thomas Jefferson University. The study was limited to those articles that could be found in the Physician Data Query and excluded those written at the "start" class or "stub" class level. Lawrence found the articles accurate but not very readable, and thought that "Wikipedia's lack of readability (to non-college readers) may reflect its varied origins and haphazard editing".[191] The Economist argued that better-written articles tend to be more reliable: "inelegant or ranting prose usually reflects muddled thoughts and incomplete information".[192] Coverage of topics and systemic bias See also: Notability in the English Wikipedia and Criticism of Wikipedia § Systemic bias in coverage Parts of this article (those related to d:Wikidata:Statistics/Wikipedia) need to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (March 2017) Wikipedia seeks to create a summary of all human knowledge in the form of an online encyclopedia, with each topic covered encyclopedically in one article. Since it has terabytes of disk space, it can have far more topics than can be covered by any printed encyclopedia.[193] The exact degree and manner of coverage on Wikipedia is under constant review by its editors, and disagreements are not uncommon (see deletionism and inclusionism).[194][195] Wikipedia contains materials that some people may find objectionable, offensive, or pornographic because Wikipedia is not censored. The policy has sometimes proved controversial: in 2008, Wikipedia rejected an online petition against the inclusion of images of Muhammad in the English edition of its Muhammad article, citing this policy. The presence of politically, religiously, and pornographically sensitive materials in Wikipedia has led to the censorship of Wikipedia by national authorities in China,[196] Pakistan,[197] and the United Kingdom,[198] among other countries. Pie chart of Wikipedia content by subject as of January 2008[199] A 2008 study conducted by researchers at Carnegie Mellon University and Palo Alto Research Center gave a distribution of topics as well as growth (from July 2006 to January 2008) in each field:[199] Culture and the arts: 30% (210%) Biographies and persons: 15% (97%) Geography and places: 14% (52%) Society and social sciences: 12% (83%) History and events: 11% (143%) Natural and physical sciences: 9% (213%) Technology and the applied sciences: 4% (?6%) Religions and belief systems: 2% (38%) Health: 2% (42%) Mathematics and logic: 1% (146%) Thought and philosophy: 1% (160%) These numbers refer only to the quantity of articles: it is possible for one topic to contain a large number of short articles and another to contain a small number of large ones. Through its "Wikipedia Loves Libraries" program, Wikipedia has partnered with major public libraries such as the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts to expand its coverage of underrepresented subjects and articles.[200] A 2011 study conducted by researchers at the University of Minnesota indicated that male and female editors focus on different coverage topics. There was a greater concentration of females in the People and Arts category, while males focus more on Geography and Science.[201] Coverage of topics and selection bias Research conducted by Mark Graham of the Oxford Internet Institute in 2009 indicated that the geographic distribution of article topics is highly uneven. Africa is most underrepresented.[202] An editorial in The Guardian in 2014 noted that women porn stars are better covered than women writers as a further example.[203] Systemic bias When multiple editors contribute to one topic or set of topics, systemic bias may arise, due to the demographic backgrounds of the editors. In 2011, Wales noted that the unevenness of coverage is a reflection of the demography of the editors, which predominantly consists of young males with high education levels in the developed world (cf. previously).[49] The October 22, 2013 essay by Tom Simonite in MIT's Technology Review titled "The Decline of Wikipedia" discussed the effect of systemic bias and policy creep on the downward trend in the number of editors.[50] Systemic bias on Wikipedia may follow that of culture generally, for example favoring certain nationalities, ethnicities or majority religions.[204] It may more specifically follow the biases of Internet culture, inclining to being young, male, English-speaking, educated, technologically aware, and wealthy enough to spare time for editing. Biases of its own may include over-emphasis on topics such as pop culture, technology, and current events.[204] Taha Yasseri of the University of Oxford, in 2013, studied the statistical trends of systemic bias at Wikipedia introduced by editing conflicts and their resolution.[205][206] His research examined the counterproductive work behavior of edit warring. Yasseri contended that simple reverts or "undo" operations were not the most significant measure of counterproductive behavior at Wikipedia and relied instead on the statistical measurement of detecting "reverting/reverted pairs" or "mutually reverting edit pairs". Such a "mutually reverting edit pair" is defined where one editor reverts the edit of another editor who then, in sequence, returns to revert the first editor in the "mutually reverting edit pairs". The results were tabulated for several language versions of Wikipedia. The English Wikipedia's three largest conflict rates belonged to the articles George W. Bush, Anarchism and Muhammad.[206] By comparison, for the German Wikipedia, the three largest conflict rates at the time of the Oxford study were for the articles covering (i) Croatia, (ii) Scientology and (iii) 9/11 conspiracy theories.[206] Researchers from the Washington University developed a statistical model to measure systematic bias in the behavior of Wikipedia's users regarding controversial topics. The authors focused on behavioral changes of the encyclopedia's administrators after assuming the post, writing that systematic bias occurred after the fact.[207][208] Identifying the filter-bubble problem Dimitra Kessenides, writing for Bloomberg News Weekly, identified the 'filter-bubble' problem as a recurrent and long-standing issue at Wikipedia.[209] As Kessenides states: "If the only way to get an article about the developing world published on Wikipedia was to know a former board member, it was hard to imagine how a random editor in Johannesburg or Bangalore would have any hope... This so-called filter-bubble problem, coined by Eli Pariser, co-founder of the viral video site Upworthy, is the idea that the internet can contribute to the insularity of certain communities. Filter bubbles have been blamed for the spread of misinformation during the 2016 presidential election and for the failure of pundits in the U.K. to anticipate Brexit... Wikipedia's filter-bubble problem is a particularly acute threat for an organization whose stated mission is 'to empower and engage people around the world.'"[209] Explicit content See also: Internet Watch Foundation and Wikipedia and Reporting of child pornography images on Wikimedia Commons “ Problem? What problem? So, you didn't know that Wikipedia has a porn problem? ” — Larry Sanger, [210] Wikipedia has been criticized for allowing information of graphic content. Articles depicting arguably objectionable content (such as Feces, Cadaver, Human penis, Vulva, and Nudity) contain graphic pictures and detailed information easily available to anyone with access to the internet, including children. The site also includes sexual content such as images and videos of masturbation and ejaculation, photographs of nude children, illustrations of zoophilia, and photos from hardcore pornographic films in its articles. The Wikipedia article about Virgin Killer—a 1976 album from German heavy metal band Scorpions—features a picture of the album's original cover, which depicts a naked prepubescent girl. The original release cover caused controversy and was replaced in some countries. In December 2008, access to the Wikipedia article Virgin Killer was blocked for four days by most Internet service providers in the United Kingdom after it was reported by a member of the public as child pornography,[211] to the Internet Watch Foundation (IWF), which issues a stop list to Internet service providers. IWF, a non-profit, non-government-affiliated organization, later criticized the inclusion of the picture as "distasteful".[212] In April 2010, Sanger wrote a letter to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, outlining his concerns that two categories of images on Wikimedia Commons contained child pornography, and were in violation of US federal obscenity law.[213] Sanger later clarified that the images, which were related to pedophilia and one about lolicon, were not of real children, but said that they constituted "obscene visual representations of the sexual abuse of children", under the PROTECT Act of 2003.[214] That law bans photographic child pornography and cartoon images and drawings of children that are obscene under American law.[214] Sanger also expressed concerns about access to the images on Wikipedia in schools.[215] Wikimedia Foundation spokesman Jay Walsh strongly rejected Sanger's accusation,[216] saying that Wikipedia did not have "material we would deem to be illegal. If we did, we would remove it."[216] Following the complaint by Sanger, Wales deleted sexual images without consulting the community. After some editors who volunteer to maintain the site argued that the decision to delete had been made hastily, Wales voluntarily gave up some of the powers he had held up to that time as part of his co-founder status. He wrote in a message to the Wikimedia Foundation mailing-list that this action was "in the interest of encouraging this discussion to be about real philosophical/content issues, rather than be about me and how quickly I acted".[217] Critics, including Wikipediocracy, noticed that many of the pornographic images deleted from Wikipedia since 2010 have reappeared.[218] Privacy One privacy concern in the case of Wikipedia is the right of a private citizen to remain a "private citizen" rather than a "public figure" in the eyes of the law.[219][notes 9] It is a battle between the right to be anonymous in cyberspace and the right to be anonymous in real life ("meatspace"). A particular problem occurs in the case of an individual who is relatively unimportant and for whom there exists a Wikipedia page against her or his wishes. In January 2006, a German court ordered the German Wikipedia shut down within Germany because it stated the full name of Boris Floricic, aka "Tron", a deceased hacker. On February 9, 2006, the injunction against Wikimedia Deutschland was overturned, with the court rejecting the notion that Tron's right to privacy or that of his parents was being violated.[220] Wikipedia has a "Volunteer Response Team" that uses the OTRS system to handle queries without having to reveal the identities of the involved parties. This is used, for example, in confirming the permission for using individual images and other media in the project.[221] Sexism Wikipedia has been described as harboring a battleground culture of sexism and harassment.[222][223] The perceived toxic attitudes and tolerance of violent and abusive language are also reasons put forth for the gender gap in Wikipedia editors.[224] In 2014, a female editor who requested a separate space on Wikipedia to discuss improving civility had her proposal referred to by a male editor using the words "the easiest way to avoid being called a cunt is not to act like one."[225] Operation A group of Wikipedia editors may form a WikiProject to focus their work on a specific topic area, using its associated discussion page to coordinate changes across multiple articles.[226] Wikimedia Foundation and Wikimedia movement affiliates Main article: Wikimedia Foundation Katherine Maher is the third executive director at Wikimedia, following the departure of Lila Tretikov in 2016. Wikipedia is hosted and funded by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization which also operates Wikipedia-related projects such as Wiktionary and Wikibooks. The foundation relies on public contributions and grants to fund its mission.[227] The foundation's 2013 IRS Form 990 shows revenue of $39.7 million and expenses of almost $29 million, with assets of $37.2 million and liabilities of about $2.3 million.[228] In May 2014, Wikimedia Foundation named Lila Tretikov as its second executive director, taking over for Sue Gardner.[229] The Wall Street Journal reported on May 1, 2014, that Tretikov's information technology background from her years at University of California offers Wikipedia an opportunity to develop in more concentrated directions guided by her often repeated position statement that, "Information, like air, wants to be free."[230][231] The same Wall Street Journal article reported these directions of development according to an interview with spokesman Jay Walsh of Wikimedia, who "said Tretikov would address that issue (paid advocacy) as a priority. 'We are really pushing toward more transparency... We are reinforcing that paid advocacy is not welcome.' Initiatives to involve greater diversity of contributors, better mobile support of Wikipedia, new geo-location tools to find local content more easily, and more tools for users in the second and third world are also priorities, Walsh said."[230] Following the departure of Tretikov from Wikipedia due to issues concerning the use of the "superprotection" feature which some language versions of Wikipedia have adopted, Katherine Maher became the third executive director the Wikimedia Foundation in June 2016.[232] Maher has stated that one of her priorities would be the issue of editor harassment endemic to Wikipedia as identified by the Wikipedia board in December. Maher stated regarding the harassment issue that: "It establishes a sense within the community that this is a priority... (and that correction requires that) it has to be more than words."[233] Wikipedia is also supported by many organizations and groups that are affiliated with the Wikimedia Foundation but independently-run, called Wikimedia movement affiliates. These include Wikimedia chapters (which are national or sub-national organizations, such as Wikimedia Deutschland and Wikimédia France), thematic organizations (such as Amical Wikimedia for the Catalan language community), and user groups. These affiliates participate in the promotion, development, and funding of Wikipedia. Software operations and support See also: MediaWiki The operation of Wikipedia depends on MediaWiki, a custom-made, free and open source wiki software platform written in PHP and built upon the MySQL database system.[234] The software incorporates programming features such as a macro language, variables, a transclusion system for templates, and URL redirection. MediaWiki is licensed under the GNU General Public License and it is used by all Wikimedia projects, as well as many other wiki projects. Originally, Wikipedia ran on UseModWiki written in Perl by Clifford Adams (Phase I), which initially required CamelCase for article hyperlinks; the present double bracket style was incorporated later. Starting in January 2002 (Phase II), Wikipedia began running on a PHP wiki engine with a MySQL database; this software was custom-made for Wikipedia by Magnus Manske. The Phase II software was repeatedly modified to accommodate the exponentially increasing demand. In July 2002 (Phase III), Wikipedia shifted to the third-generation software, MediaWiki, originally written by Lee Daniel Crocker. Several MediaWiki extensions are installed[235] to extend the functionality of the MediaWiki software. In April 2005, a Lucene extension[236][237] was added to MediaWiki's built-in search and Wikipedia switched from MySQL to Lucene for searching. The site currently uses Lucene Search 2.1,[238][needs update] which is written in Java and based on Lucene library 2.3.[239] In July 2013, after extensive beta testing, a WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) extension, VisualEditor, was opened to public use.[240][241][242][243] It was met with much rejection and criticism, and was described as "slow and buggy".[244] The feature was changed from opt-out to opt-in afterward. Automated editing Computer programs called bots have been used widely to perform simple and repetitive tasks, such as correcting common misspellings and stylistic issues, or to start articles such as geography entries in a standard format from statistical data.[245][246][247] One controversial contributor massively creating articles with his bot was reported to create up to ten thousand articles on the Swedish Wikipedia on certain days.[248] There are also some bots designed to automatically notify editors when they make common editing errors (such as unmatched quotes or unmatched parenthesis).[249] Edits misidentified by a bot as the work of a banned editor can be restored by other editors. An anti-vandal bot tries to detect and revert vandalism quickly and automatically.[246] Bots can also report edits from particular accounts or IP address ranges, as was done at the time of the MH17 jet downing incident in July 2014.[250] Bots on Wikipedia must be approved prior to activation.[251] According to Andrew Lih, the current expansion of Wikipedia to millions of articles would be difficult to envision without the use of such bots.[252] Wikiprojects, and assessments of articles' importance and quality This section is transcluded from English Wikipedia. (edit | history) Main article: WikiProject A "WikiProject" is a group of contributors who want to work together as a team to improve Wikipedia. These groups often focus on a specific topic area (for example, women's history), a specific location or a specific kind of task (for example, checking newly created pages). The English Wikipedia currently has over 2,000 WikiProjects and activity varies.[253] In 2007, in preparation for producing a print version, the English Wikipedia introduced an assessment scale of the quality of articles.[254] Articles are rated by WikiProjects. The range of quality classes begins with "Stub" (very short pages), followed by "Start", "C" and "B" (in increasing order of quality). Community peer review is needed for the article to enter one of the highest quality classes: either "A", "good article" or the highest, "featured article". Of the about 4.4 million articles and lists assessed as of March 2015, a little more than 5,000 (0.12%) are featured articles, and fewer than 2,000 (0.04%) are featured lists. One featured article per day, as selected by editors, appears on the main page of Wikipedia.[255][256] The articles can also be rated as per "importance" as judged by a WikiProject. Currently, there are 5 importance categories: "low", "mid", "high", "top", and "???" for unclassified/uncertain level. For a particular article, different WikiProjects may assign different importance levels. The Wikipedia Version 1.0 Editorial Team has developed a table (shown below) that displays data of all rated articles by quality and importance, on the English Wikipedia. If an article or list receives different ratings by two or more WikiProjects, then the highest rating is used in the table, pie-charts, and bar-chart. The software regularly auto-updates the data. Researcher Giacomo Poderi found that articles tend to reach featured status via the intensive work of a few editors.[257] A 2010 study found unevenness in quality among featured articles and concluded that the community process is ineffective in assessing the quality of articles.[258] Quality-wise distribution of over 5.5 million articles and lists on the English Wikipedia, as of 29 January 2017[update][259]   Featured articles (0.11%)   Featured lists (0.04%)   A class (0.03%)   Good articles (0.50%)   B class (2.00%)   C class (4.32%)   Start class (26.41%)   Stub class (53.01%)   Lists (3.65%)   Unassessed (9.94%) Importance-wise distribution of over 5.5 million articles and lists on the English Wikipedia, as of 29 January 2017[update][259]   Top (0.91%)   High (3.20%)   Medium (12.21%)   Low (51.68%)   ??? (32.00%) All rated articles by quality and importance Quality Importance Top High Mid Low ??? Total FA 1,189 1,841 1,732 1,091 191 6,044 FL 142 567 670 600 120 2,099 A 224 430 580 372 79 1,685 GA 2,113 4,819 9,439 10,277 1,749 28,397 B 12,177 23,035 35,303 28,337 13,885 112,737 C 10,410 30,260 67,693 94,179 43,950 246,492 Start 17,315 76,691 308,832 802,184 295,178 1,500,200 Stub 4,247 30,928 228,127 1,887,219 844,350 2,994,871 List 3,062 11,393 34,727 94,961 62,202 206,345 Assessed 50,879 179,964 687,103 2,919,220 1,261,704 5,098,870 Unassessed 137 431 1,665 16,008 533,078 551,319 Total 51,016 180,395 688,768 2,935,228 1,794,782 5,650,189 500,000 1,000,000 1,500,000 2,000,000 2,500,000 3,000,000 Top High Medium Low ???   Featured articles   Featured lists   A-class articles   Good articles   B-class articles   C-class articles   Start-class articles   Stub articles   Lists   Unassessed articles and lists [Note: The table above (prepared by the Wikipedia Version 1.0 Editorial Team) is automatically updated daily by User:WP 1.0 bot, but the bar-chart and the two pie-charts are not auto-updated. In them, new data has to be entered by a Wikipedia editor (i.e. user).] Hardware operations and support See also: Wikimedia Foundation § Hardware Wikipedia receives between 25,000 and 60,000 page requests per second, depending on time of day.[260] As of 2008[update] page requests are first passed to a front-end layer of Squid caching servers.[261][needs update] Further statistics, based on a publicly available 3-month Wikipedia access trace, are available.[262] Requests that cannot be served from the Squid cache are sent to load-balancing servers running the Linux Virtual Server software, which in turn pass them to one of the Apache web servers for page rendering from the database. The web servers deliver pages as requested, performing page rendering for all the language editions of Wikipedia. To increase speed further, rendered pages are cached in a distributed memory cache until invalidated, allowing page rendering to be skipped entirely for most common page accesses. Overview of system architecture as of December 2010[update] Wikipedia currently runs on dedicated clusters of Linux servers (mainly Ubuntu).[263][264] As of December 2009[update], there were 300 in Florida and 44 in Amsterdam.[265] By January 22, 2013, Wikipedia had migrated its primary data center to an Equinix facility in Ashburn, Virginia.[266][267] Internal research and operational development In accordance with growing amounts of incoming donations exceeding seven digits in 2013 as recently reported,[50] the Foundation has reached a threshold of assets which qualify its consideration under the principles of industrial organization economics to indicate the need for the re-investment of donations into the internal research and development of the Foundation.[268] Two of the recent projects of such internal research and development have been the creation of a Visual Editor and a largely under-utilized "Thank" tab which were developed for the purpose of ameliorating issues of editor attrition, which have met with limited success.[50][244] The estimates for reinvestment by industrial organizations into internal research and development was studied by Adam Jaffe, who recorded that the range of 4% to 25% annually was to be recommended, with high end technology requiring the higher level of support for internal reinvestment.[269] At the 2013 level of contributions for Wikimedia presently documented as 45 million dollars, the computed budget level recommended by Jaffe and Caballero for reinvestment into internal research and development is between 1.8 million and 11.3 million dollars annually.[269] In 2016, the level of contributions were reported by Blomberg News as being at $77 million annually, updating the Jaffe estimates for the higher level of support to between 3.08 million and 19.2 million dollars annually.[269] Internal news publications Community-produced news publications include the English Wikipedia's The Signpost, founded in 2005 by Michael Snow, an attorney, Wikipedia administrator and former chair of the Wikimedia Foundation board of trustees.[270] It covers news and events from the site, as well as major events from other Wikimedia projects, such as Wikimedia Commons. Similar publications are the German-language Kurier, and the Portuguese-language Correio da Wikipédia. Other past and present community news publications on English Wikipedia include the "Wikiworld" web comic, the Wikipedia Weekly podcast, and newsletters of specific WikiProjects like The Bugle from WikiProject Military History and the monthly newsletter from The Guild of Copy Editors. There are also a number of publications from the Wikimedia Foundation and multilingual publications such as the Wikimedia Blog and This Month in Education. Access to content Content licensing When the project was started in 2001, all text in Wikipedia was covered by the GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL), a copyleft license permitting the redistribution, creation of derivative works, and commercial use of content while authors retain copyright of their work.[271] The GFDL was created for software manuals that come with free software programs licensed under the GPL. This made it a poor choice for a general reference work: for example, the GFDL requires the reprints of materials from Wikipedia to come with a full copy of the GFDL text. In December 2002, the Creative Commons license was released: it was specifically designed for creative works in general, not just for software manuals. The license gained popularity among bloggers and others distributing creative works on the Web. The Wikipedia project sought the switch to the Creative Commons.[272] Because the two licenses, GFDL and Creative Commons, were incompatible, in November 2008, following the request of the project, the Free Software Foundation (FSF) released a new version of the GFDL designed specifically to allow Wikipedia to relicense its content to CC BY-SA by August 1, 2009. (A new version of the GFDL automatically covers Wikipedia contents.) In April 2009, Wikipedia and its sister projects held a community-wide referendum which decided the switch in June 2009.[273][274][275][276] The handling of media files (e.g. image files) varies across language editions. Some language editions, such as the English Wikipedia, include non-free image files under fair use doctrine, while the others have opted not to, in part because of the lack of fair use doctrines in their home countries (e.g. in Japanese copyright law). Media files covered by free content licenses (e.g. Creative Commons' CC BY-SA) are shared across language editions via Wikimedia Commons repository, a project operated by the Wikimedia Foundation. Wikipedia's accommodation of varying international copyright laws regarding images has led some to observe that its photographic coverage of topics lags behind the quality of the encyclopedic text.[277] The Wikimedia Foundation is not a licensor of content, but merely a hosting service for the contributors (and licensors) of the Wikipedia. This position has been successfully defended in court.[278][279] Methods of access Because Wikipedia content is distributed under an open license, anyone can reuse or re-distribute it at no charge. The content of Wikipedia has been published in many forms, both online and offline, outside of the Wikipedia website. Websites – Thousands of "mirror sites" exist that republish content from Wikipedia: two prominent ones, that also include content from other reference sources, are Reference.com and Answers.com. Another example is Wapedia, which began to display Wikipedia content in a mobile-device-friendly format before Wikipedia itself did. Mobile apps – A variety of mobile apps provide access to Wikipedia on hand-held devices, including both Android and iOS devices (see Wikipedia apps). (See also Mobile access.) Search engines – Some web search engines make special use of Wikipedia content when displaying search results: examples include Bing (via technology gained from Powerset)[280] and DuckDuckGo. Compact discs, DVDs – Collections of Wikipedia articles have been published on optical discs. An English version, 2006 Wikipedia CD Selection, contained about 2,000 articles.[281][282] The Polish-language version contains nearly 240,000 articles.[283] There are German- and Spanish-language versions as well.[284][285] Also, "Wikipedia for Schools", the Wikipedia series of CDs / DVDs produced by Wikipedians and SOS Children, is a free, hand-checked, non-commercial selection from Wikipedia targeted around the UK National Curriculum and intended to be useful for much of the English-speaking world.[286] The project is available online; an equivalent print encyclopedia would require roughly 20 volumes. Printed books – There are efforts to put a select subset of Wikipedia's articles into printed book form.[287][288] Since 2009, tens of thousands of print-on-demand books that reproduced English, German, Russian and French Wikipedia articles have been produced by the American company Books LLC and by three Mauritian subsidiaries of the German publisher VDM.[289] Semantic Web – The website DBpedia, begun in 2007, extracts data from the infoboxes and category declarations of the English-language Wikipedia. Wikimedia has created the Wikidata project with a similar objective of storing the basic facts from each page of Wikipedia and the other WMF wikis and make it available in a queriable semantic format, RDF. This is still under development. As of Feb 2014 it has 15,000,000 items and 1,000 properties for describing them. Obtaining the full contents of Wikipedia for reuse presents challenges, since direct cloning via a web crawler is discouraged.[290] Wikipedia publishes "dumps" of its contents, but these are text-only; as of 2007[update] there was no dump available of Wikipedia's images.[291] Several languages of Wikipedia also maintain a reference desk, where volunteers answer questions from the general public. According to a study by Pnina Shachaf in the Journal of Documentation, the quality of the Wikipedia reference desk is comparable to a standard library reference desk, with an accuracy of 55%.[292] Mobile access See also: Help:Mobile access The mobile version of the English Wikipedia's main page Wikipedia's original medium was for users to read and edit content using any standard web browser through a fixed Internet connection. Although Wikipedia content has been accessible through the mobile web since July 2013, The New York Times on February 9, 2014, quoted Erik Möller, deputy director of the Wikimedia Foundation, stating that the transition of internet traffic from desktops to mobile devices was significant and a cause for concern and worry.[16] The article in The New York Times reported the comparison statistics for mobile edits stating that, "Only 20 percent of the readership of the English-language Wikipedia comes via mobile devices, a figure substantially lower than the percentage of mobile traffic for other media sites, many of which approach 50 percent. And the shift to mobile editing has lagged even more."[16] The New York Times reports that Möller has assigned "a team of 10 software developers focused on mobile", out of a total of approximately 200 employees working at the Wikimedia Foundation. One principal concern cited by The New York Times for the "worry" is for Wikipedia to effectively address attrition issues with the number of editors which the online encyclopedia attracts to edit and maintain its content in a mobile access environment.[16] Bloomberg Businessweek reported in July 2014 that Google's Android mobile apps have dominated the largest share of global smartphone shipments for 2013 with 78.6% of market share over their next closest competitor in iOS with 15.2% of the market.[293] At the time of the Tretikov appointment and her posted web interview with Sue Gardner in May 2014, Wikimedia representatives made a technical announcement concerning the number of mobile access systems in the market seeking access to Wikipedia. Directly after the posted web interview, the representatives stated that Wikimedia would be applying an all-inclusive approach to accommodate as many mobile access systems as possible in its efforts for expanding general mobile access, including BlackBerry and the Windows Phone system, making market share a secondary issue.[231] The latest version of the Android app for Wikipedia was released on July 23, 2014, to generally positive reviews, scoring over four of a possible five in a poll of approximately 200,000 users downloading from Google.[294] The latest version for iOS was released on April 3, 2013, to similar reviews.[295] Access to Wikipedia from mobile phones was possible as early as 2004, through the Wireless Application Protocol (WAP), via the Wapedia service. In June 2007 Wikipedia launched en.mobile.wikipedia.org, an official website for wireless devices. In 2009 a newer mobile service was officially released,[296] located at en.m.wikipedia.org, which caters to more advanced mobile devices such as the iPhone, Android-based devices or WebOS-based devices. Several other methods of mobile access to Wikipedia have emerged. Many devices and applications optimize or enhance the display of Wikipedia content for mobile devices, while some also incorporate additional features such as use of Wikipedia metadata (See Wikipedia:Metadata), such as geoinformation.[297][298] Wikipedia Zero is an initiative of the Wikimedia Foundation to expand the reach of the encyclopedia to the developing countries.[299] Andrew Lih and Andrew Brown both maintain editing Wikipedia with smart phones is difficult and this discourages new potential contributors. Several years running the number of Wikipedia editors has been falling and Tom Simonite of MIT Technology Review claims the bureaucratic structure and rules are a factor in this. Simonite alleges some Wikipedians use the labyrinthine rules and guidelines to dominate others and those editors have a vested interest in keeping the status quo.[50] Lih alleges there is serious disagreement among existing contributors how to resolve this. Lih fears for Wikipedia's long term future while Brown fears problems with Wikipedia will remain and rival encyclopedias will not replace it.[300][301] Cultural impact Readership Wikipedia is extremely popular. In February 2014, The New York Times reported that Wikipedia is ranked fifth globally among all websites, stating "With 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors a month […] Wikipedia trails just Yahoo, Facebook, Microsoft and Google, the largest with 1.2 billion unique visitors."[16] In addition to logistic growth in the number of its articles,[302] Wikipedia has steadily gained status as a general reference website since its inception in 2001.[303] About 50% of search engine traffic to Wikipedia comes from Google,[304] a good portion of which is related to academic research.[305] The number of readers of Wikipedia worldwide reached 365 million at the end of 2009.[306] The Pew Internet and American Life project found that one third of US Internet users consulted Wikipedia.[307] In 2011 Business Insider gave Wikipedia a valuation of $4 billion if it ran advertisements.[308] According to "Wikipedia Readership Survey 2011", the average age of Wikipedia readers is 36, with a rough parity between genders. Almost half of Wikipedia readers visit the site more than five times a month, and a similar number of readers specifically look for Wikipedia in search engine results. About 47% of Wikipedia readers do not realize that Wikipedia is a non-profit organization.[309] Cultural significance Main article: Wikipedia in culture Wikipedia Monument in S?ubice, Poland Wikipedia's content has also been used in academic studies, books, conferences, and court cases.[310][311][312] The Parliament of Canada's website refers to Wikipedia's article on same-sex marriage in the "related links" section of its "further reading" list for the Civil Marriage Act.[313] The encyclopedia's assertions are increasingly used as a source by organizations such as the US federal courts and the World Intellectual Property Organization[314] – though mainly for supporting information rather than information decisive to a case.[315] Content appearing on Wikipedia has also been cited as a source and referenced in some US intelligence agency reports.[316] In December 2008, the scientific journal RNA Biology launched a new section for descriptions of families of RNA molecules and requires authors who contribute to the section to also submit a draft article on the RNA family for publication in Wikipedia.[317] Wikipedia has also been used as a source in journalism,[318][319] often without attribution, and several reporters have been dismissed for plagiarizing from Wikipedia.[320][321][322] In 2006, Time magazine recognized Wikipedia's participation (along with YouTube, Reddit, MySpace, and Facebook[323]) in the rapid growth of online collaboration and interaction by millions of people worldwide. In July 2007 Wikipedia was the focus of a 30-minute documentary on BBC Radio 4[324] which argued that, with increased usage and awareness, the number of references to Wikipedia in popular culture is such that the word is one of a select band of 21st-century nouns that are so familiar (Google, Facebook, YouTube) that they no longer need explanation. On September 28, 2007, Italian politician Franco Grillini raised a parliamentary question with the minister of cultural resources and activities about the necessity of freedom of panorama. He said that the lack of such freedom forced Wikipedia, "the seventh most consulted website", to forbid all images of modern Italian buildings and art, and claimed this was hugely damaging to tourist revenues.[325] Play media Wikipedia, an introduction – Erasmus Prize 2015 Jimmy Wales receiving the Quadriga A Mission of Enlightenment award On September 16, 2007, The Washington Post reported that Wikipedia had become a focal point in the 2008 US election campaign, saying: "Type a candidate's name into Google, and among the first results is a Wikipedia page, making those entries arguably as important as any ad in defining a candidate. Already, the presidential entries are being edited, dissected and debated countless times each day."[326] An October 2007 Reuters article, titled "Wikipedia page the latest status symbol", reported the recent phenomenon of how having a Wikipedia article vindicates one's notability.[327] Active participation also has an impact. Law students have been assigned to write Wikipedia articles as an exercise in clear and succinct writing for an uninitiated audience.[328] A working group led by Peter Stone (formed as a part of the Stanford-based project One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence) in its report called Wikipedia "the best-known example of crowdsourcing... that far exceeds traditionally-compiled information sources, such as encyclopedias and dictionaries, in scale and depth."[329] Awards Wikipedia team visiting to Parliament of Asturias Wikipedians meeting after the Asturias awards ceremony Wikipedia won two major awards in May 2004.[330] The first was a Golden Nica for Digital Communities of the annual Prix Ars Electronica contest; this came with a €10,000 (£6,588; $12,700) grant and an invitation to present at the PAE Cyberarts Festival in Austria later that year. The second was a Judges' Webby Award for the "community" category.[331] Wikipedia was also nominated for a "Best Practices" Webby award. In 2007, readers of brandchannel.com voted Wikipedia as the fourth-highest brand ranking, receiving 15% of the votes in answer to the question "Which brand had the most impact on our lives in 2006?"[332] In September 2008, Wikipedia received Quadriga A Mission of Enlightenment award of Werkstatt Deutschland along with Boris Tadi?, Eckart Höfling, and Peter Gabriel. The award was presented to Wales by David Weinberger.[333] In 2015, Wikipedia was awarded both the annual Erasmus Prize, which recognizes exceptional contributions to culture, society or social sciences,[334] and the Spanish Princess of Asturias Award on International Cooperation.[335] Speaking at the Asturian Parliament in Oviedo, the city that hosts the awards ceremony, Jimmy Wales praised the work of the Asturian language Wikipedia users.[336] The night of the ceremony, members of the Wikimedia Foundation held a meeting with Wikipedians from all parts of Spain, including the local Asturian community. Satire See also: Category:Parodies of Wikipedia. Many parodies target Wikipedia's openness and susceptibility to inserted inaccuracies, with characters vandalizing or modifying the online encyclopedia project's articles. Comedian Stephen Colbert has parodied or referenced Wikipedia on numerous episodes of his show The Colbert Report and coined the related term wikiality, meaning "together we can create a reality that we all agree on—the reality we just agreed on".[177] Another example can be found in "Wikipedia Celebrates 750 Years of American Independence", a July 2006 front-page article in The Onion,[337] as well as the 2010 The Onion article "'L.A. Law' Wikipedia Page Viewed 874 Times Today".[338] In an episode of the television comedy The Office U.S., which aired in April 2007, an incompetent office manager (Michael Scott) is shown relying on a hypothetical Wikipedia article for information on negotiation tactics in order to assist him in negotiating lesser pay for an employee.[339] The tactics he used failed, as a joke about the unreliability of Wikipedia and what anyone can do to change its contents. Viewers of the show tried to add the episode's mention of the page as a section of the actual Wikipedia article on negotiation, but this effort was prevented by other users on the article's talk page.[340] "My Number One Doctor", a 2007 episode of the television show Scrubs, played on the perception that Wikipedia is an unreliable reference tool with a scene in which Dr. Perry Cox reacts to a patient who says that a Wikipedia article indicates that the raw food diet reverses the effects of bone cancer by retorting that the same editor who wrote that article also wrote the Battlestar Galactica episode guide.[341] In 2008, the comedic website CollegeHumor produced a video sketch named "Professor Wikipedia", in which the fictitious Professor Wikipedia instructs a class with a medley of unverifiable and occasionally absurd statements.[342] The Dilbert comic strip from May 8, 2009, features a character supporting an improbable claim by saying "Give me ten minutes and then check Wikipedia."[343] In July 2009, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a comedy series called Bigipedia, which was set on a website which was a parody of Wikipedia. Some of the sketches were directly inspired by Wikipedia and its articles.[344] In 2010, comedian Daniel Tosh encouraged viewers of his show, Tosh.0, to visit the show's Wikipedia article and edit it at will. On a later episode, he commented on the edits to the article, most of them offensive, which had been made by the audience and had prompted the article to be locked from editing.[345][346] On August 23, 2013, the New Yorker website published a cartoon with this caption: "Dammit, Manning, have you considered the pronoun war that this is going to start on your Wikipedia page?"[347] In December 2015, John Julius Norwich stated, in a letter published in The Times newspaper, that as an historian he resorted to Wikipedia "at least a dozen times a day", and had never yet caught it out. He described it as "a work of reference as useful as any in existence", with so wide a range that it is almost impossible to find a person, place or thing that it has left uncovered, and that he could never have written his last two books without it.[348][349] Sister projects – Wikimedia Main article: Wikimedia project Wikipedia has also spawned several sister projects, which are also wikis run by the Wikimedia Foundation. These other Wikimedia projects include Wiktionary, a dictionary project launched in December 2002,[350] Wikiquote, a collection of quotations created a week after Wikimedia launched, Wikibooks, a collection of collaboratively written free textbooks and annotated texts, Wikimedia Commons, a site devoted to free-knowledge multimedia, Wikinews, for citizen journalism, and Wikiversity, a project for the creation of free learning materials and the provision of online learning activities.[351] Of these, only Commons has had success comparable to that of Wikipedia. Another sister project of Wikipedia, Wikispecies, is a catalogue of species. In 2012 Wikivoyage, an editable travel guide, and Wikidata, an editable knowledge base, launched. Publishing A group of Wikimedians of the Wikimedia DC chapter at the 2013 DC Wikimedia annual meeting standing in front of the Encyclopædia Britannica (back left) at the US National Archives The most obvious economic effect of Wikipedia has been the death of commercial encyclopedias, especially the printed versions, e.g. Encyclopædia Britannica, which were unable to compete with a product that is essentially free.[352][353][354] Nicholas Carr wrote a 2005 essay, "The amorality of Web 2.0", that criticized websites with user-generated content, like Wikipedia, for possibly leading to professional (and, in his view, superior) content producers' going out of business, because "free trumps quality all the time". Carr wrote: "Implicit in the ecstatic visions of Web 2.0 is the hegemony of the amateur. I for one can't imagine anything more frightening."[355] Others dispute the notion that Wikipedia, or similar efforts, will entirely displace traditional publications. For instance, Chris Anderson, the editor-in-chief of Wired Magazine, wrote in Nature that the "wisdom of crowds" approach of Wikipedia will not displace top scientific journals, with their rigorous peer review process.[356] There is also an ongoing debate about the influence of Wikipedia on the biography publishing business. "The worry is that, if you can get all that information from Wikipedia, what's left for biography?" said Kathryn Hughes, professor of life writing at UEA and author of The Short Life and Long Times of Mrs Beeton and George Eliot: the Last Victorian.[357] Scientific use Wikipedia has seen been widely used as a corpus for linguistic research in computational linguistics, information retrieval and natural language processing. In particular, it commonly serves as a target knowledge base for the entity linking problem, which is then called "wikification",[358] and to the related problem of word sense disambiguation.[359] Methods similar to wikification can in turn be used to find "missing" links in Wikipedia.[360] In 2015, French researchers Dr José Lages of the University of Franche-Comté in Besançon and Dima Shepelyansky of Paul Sabatier University in Toulouse published a global university ranking based on Wikipedia scholarly citations.[361][362][363] They used PageRank "followed by the number of appearances in the 24 different language editions of Wikipedia (descending order) and the century in which they were founded (ascending order)."[363] Related projects A number of interactive multimedia encyclopedias incorporating entries written by the public existed long before Wikipedia was founded. The first of these was the 1986 BBC Domesday Project, which included text (entered on BBC Micro computers) and photographs from over 1 million contributors in the UK, and covered the geography, art, and culture of the UK. This was the first interactive multimedia encyclopedia (and was also the first major multimedia document connected through internal links), with the majority of articles being accessible through an interactive map of the UK. The user interface and part of the content of the Domesday Project were emulated on a website until 2008.[364] Several free-content, collaborative encyclopedias were created around the same period as Wikipedia (e.g. Everything2),[365] with many later being merged into the project (e.g. GNE).[366] One of the most successful early online encyclopedias incorporating entries by the public was h2g2, which was created by Douglas Adams in 1999. The h2g2 encyclopedia is relatively light-hearted, focusing on articles which are both witty and informative. Subsequent collaborative knowledge websites have drawn inspiration from Wikipedia. Some, such as Susning.nu, Enciclopedia Libre, Hudong, and Baidu Baike likewise employ no formal review process, although some like Conservapedia are not as open. Others use more traditional peer review, such as Encyclopedia of Life and the online wiki encyclopedias Scholarpedia and Citizendium. The latter was started by Sanger in an attempt to create a reliable alternative to Wikipedia.[367][368] See also Internet portal Outline of Wikipedia – guide to the subject of Wikipedia presented as a tree structured list of its subtopics; for an outline of the contents of Wikipedia, see Portal:Contents/Outlines Conflict-of-interest editing on Wikipedia Democratization of knowledge Interpedia, an early proposal for a collaborative Internet encyclopedia List of Internet encyclopedias Network effect Print Wikipedia art project to visualize how big Wikipedia is. In cooperation with Wikimedia foundation. QRpedia – multilingual, mobile interface to Wikipedia Wikipedia Review References ^ Sidener, Jonathan (December 6, 2004). "Everyone's Encyclopedia". U-T San Diego. Archived from the original on January 14, 2016. Retrieved October 15, 2006.  ^ Roger Chapman. "Top 40 Website Programming Languages". roadchap.com. Archived from the original on September 22, 2013. Retrieved September 6, 2011.  CS1 maint: Unfit url (link) ^ "Wikipedia founder defends decision to encrypt the site in China". The Verge. Retrieved September 19, 2015.  ^ Bill Tancer (May 1, 2007). "Look Who's Using Wikipedia". Time. Retrieved December 1, 2007. The sheer volume of content […] is partly responsible for the site's dominance as an online reference. When compared to the top 3,200 educational reference sites in the US, Wikipedia is No. 1, capturing 24.3% of all visits to the category . Cf. Bill Tancer (Global Manager, Hitwise), "Wikipedia, Search and School Homework" Archived March 25, 2012, at the Wayback Machine., Hitwise, March 1, 2007. ^ Alex Woodson (July 8, 2007). "Wikipedia remains go-to site for online news". Reuters. Retrieved December 16, 2007. Online encyclopedia Wikipedia has added about 20 million unique monthly visitors in the past year, making it the top online news and information destination, according to Nielsen//NetRatings.  ^ "comScore MMX Ranks Top 50 US Web Properties for August 2012". comScore. September 12, 2012. Retrieved February 6, 2013.  ^ a b c "How popular is wikipedia.org?". Alexa Internet. May 22, 2016. Retrieved September 4, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia pornography row deepens as Wales cedes rights – BBC News". BBC. Retrieved June 28, 2016.  ^ "The Mysterious Workings of Wikis: Who Owns What?". Ecommercetimes.com. Retrieved June 28, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation employee ousted over paid editing". Ars Technica. Retrieved June 28, 2016.  ^ a b Kock, N., Jung, Y., & Syn, T. (2016). Wikipedia and e-Collaboration Research: Opportunities and Challenges. Archived September 27, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. International Journal of e-Collaboration (IJeC), 12(2), 1–8. ^ Mike Miliard (March 1, 2008). "Wikipediots: Who Are These Devoted, Even Obsessive Contributors to Wikipedia?". Salt Lake City Weekly. Retrieved December 18, 2008.  ^ Sidener, Jonathan (October 9, 2006). "Wikipedia family feud rooted in San Diego". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Archived from the original on November 11, 2016. Retrieved May 5, 2009.  ^ "Wiki" in the Hawaiian Dictionary, revised and enlarged edition, University of Hawaii Press, 1986 ^ "Wikipedia cofounder Jimmy Wales on 60 Minutes". CBS News. Retrieved April 6, 2015.  ^ a b c d e f Cohen, Noam (February 9, 2014). "Wikipedia vs. the Small Screen". The New York Times.  ^ "Comparing featured article groups and revision patterns correlations in Wikipedia". First Monday. Retrieved July 13, 2010.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin Wattenberg; Matthew M. McKeon (July 22, 2007). "The Hidden Order of Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved October 30, 2007.  ^ a b Jim Giles (December 2005). "Internet encyclopedias go head to head". Nature. 438 (7070): 900–901. Bibcode:2005Natur.438..900G. doi:10.1038/438900a. PMID 16355180. (subscription required) Note: The study was cited in several news articles; e.g.: "Wikipedia survives research test". BBC News. December 15, 2005.  ^ a b c Black, Edwin (April 19, 2010) Wikipedia – The Dumbing Down of World Knowledge Archived September 9, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., History News Network Retrieved October 21, 2014 ^ a b J. Petrilli, Michael (SPRING 2008/Vol.8, No.2) Wikipedia or Wickedpedia? Archived November 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., Education Next Retrieved October 22, 2014 ^ "The contribution conundrum: Why did Wikipedia succeed while other encyclopedias failed?". Nieman Lab. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Richard M. Stallman (June 20, 2007). "The Free Encyclopedia Project". Free Software Foundation. Retrieved January 4, 2008.  ^ Jonathan Sidener (December 6, 2004). "Everyone's Encyclopedia". U-T San Diego. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved October 15, 2006.  ^ Meyers, Peter (September 20, 2001). "Fact-Driven? Collegial? This Site Wants You". The New York Times. Retrieved November 22, 2007. 'I can start an article that will consist of one paragraph, and then a real expert will come along and add three paragraphs and clean up my one paragraph,' said Larry Sanger of Las Vegas, who founded Wikipedia with Mr. Wales.  ^ a b c Sanger, Larry (April 18, 2005). "The Early History of Nupedia and Wikipedia: A Memoir". Slashdot. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Sanger, Larry (January 17, 2001). "Wikipedia Is Up!". Archived from the original on May 6, 2001. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia-l: LinkBacks?". Retrieved February 20, 2007.  ^ Sanger, Larry (January 10, 2001). "Let's Make a Wiki". Internet Archive. Archived from the original on April 14, 2003. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia: HomePage". Archived from the original on March 31, 2001. Retrieved March 31, 2001.  ^ "Wikipedia:Neutral point of view, Wikipedia (January 21, 2007). ^ Finkelstein, Seth (September 25, 2008). "Read me first: Wikipedia isn't about human potential, whatever Wales says". London: The Guardian.  ^ "Wikipedia, August 8, 2001". Web.archive.bibalex.org. August 8, 2001. Archived from the original on July 27, 2001. Retrieved March 3, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia, September 25, 2001". Web.archive.bibalex.org. Archived from the original on March 31, 2001. Retrieved March 3, 2014.  ^ "Multilingual statistics". Wikipedia. March 30, 2005. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Encyclopedias and Dictionaries". Encyclopædia Britannica. 18 (15th ed.). 2007. pp. 257–286.  ^ "[long] Enciclopedia Libre: msg#00008". Osdir. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Clay Shirky (February 28, 2008). Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing Without Organizations. The Penguin Press via Amazon Online Reader. p. 273. ISBN 1-59420-153-6. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Bobbie Johnson (August 12, 2009). "Wikipedia approaches its limits". The Guardian. London. Retrieved March 31, 2010.  ^ Wikipedia:Modelling_Wikipedia_extended_growth ^ The Singularity is Not Near: Slowing Growth of Wikipedia (PDF). The International Symposium on Wikis. Orlando, Florida. 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 11, 2011.  ^ Evgeny Morozov (November–December 2009). "Edit This Page; Is it the end of Wikipedia". Boston Review.  ^ Cohen, Noam (March 28, 2009). "Wikipedia – Exploring Fact City". The New York Times. Retrieved April 19, 2011.  ^ Austin Gibbons, David Vetrano, Susan Biancani (2012). Wikipedia: Nowhere to grow ^ Jenny Kleeman (November 26, 2009). "Wikipedia falling victim to a war of words". The Guardian. London. Retrieved March 31, 2010.  ^ "Wikipedia: A quantitative analysis". Archived from the original (PDF) on April 3, 2012.  ^ Volunteers Log Off as Wikipedia Ages, The Wall Street Journal, November 27, 2009. ^ Barnett, Emma (November 26, 2009). "Wikipedia's Jimmy Wales denies site is 'losing' thousands of volunteer editors". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved March 31, 2010.  ^ a b Kevin Rawlinson (August 8, 2011). "Wikipedia seeks women to balance its 'geeky' editors". The Independent. Retrieved April 5, 2012.  ^ a b c d e Simonite, Tom (October 22, 2013). "The Decline of Wikipedia". MIT Technology Review. Retrieved November 30, 2013.  ^ "3 Charts That Show How Wikipedia Is Running Out of Admins". The Atlantic. July 16, 2012.  ^ Ward, Katherine. New York Magazine, issue of November 25, 2013, p. 18. ^ "Wikipedia Breaks Into US Top 10 Sites". PCWorld. February 17, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedia.org Site Overview". alexa.com. Retrieved December 4, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia Traffic Analysis Report – Wikipedia Page Views Per Country". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 8, 2015.  ^ Netburn, Deborah (January 19, 2012). "Wikipedia: SOPA protest led 8 million to look up reps in Congress". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved March 6, 2012.  ^ "Wikipedia joins blackout protest at US anti-piracy moves". BBC News. January 18, 2012. Retrieved January 19, 2012.  ^ "SOPA/Blackoutpage". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved January 19, 2012.  ^ Jeff Loveland and Joseph Reagle (January 15, 2013). "Wikipedia and encyclopedic production. New Media & Society. Sage Journals". New Media & Society. 15 (8): 1294. doi:10.1177/1461444812470428.  ^ Rebecca J. Rosen (January 30, 2013). "What If the Great Wikipedia 'Revolution' Was Actually a Reversion? • The Atlantic". Retrieved February 9, 2013.  ^ a b c Varma, Subodh (January 20, 2014). "Google eating into Wikipedia page views?". The Economic Times. Times Internet Limited. Retrieved February 10, 2014.  ^ "Alexa Top 500 Global Sites". Alexa Internet. Retrieved December 28, 2016.  ^ a b "Wikipedia Statistics (English)". stats.wikimedia.org.  ^ a b Zittrain, Jonathan (2008). The Future of the Internet and How to Stop It – Chapter 6: The Lessons of Wikipedia. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-12487-3. Archived from the original on February 16, 2009. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Registration notes ^ Protection Policy ^ Hafner, Katie (June 17, 2006). "Growing Wikipedia Refines Its 'Anyone Can Edit' Policy". The New York Times. Retrieved December 5, 2016.  ^ English Wikipedia's protection policy ^ English Wikipedia's full protection policy ^ a b Birken, P. (December 14, 2008). "Bericht Gesichtete Versionen". Wikide-l (Mailing list) (in German). Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved February 15, 2009.  ^ William Henderson (December 10, 2012). "Wikipedia Has Figured Out A New Way To Stop Vandals In Their Tracks". Business Insider.  ^ Frewin, Jonathan (June 15, 2010). "Wikipedia unlocks divisive pages for editing". BBC News. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ a b Kleinz, Torsten (February 2005). "World of Knowledge" (PDF). Linux Magazine. Retrieved July 13, 2007. The Wikipedia's open structure makes it a target for trolls and vandals who malevolently add incorrect information to articles, get other people tied up in endless discussions, and generally do everything to draw attention to themselves.  ^ Wikipedia:New pages patrol ^ Andrea Ciffolilli, "Phantom authority, self-selective recruitment and retention of members in virtual communities: The case of Wikipedia" Archived December 6, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., First Monday December 2003. ^ West, Andrew G.; Chang, Jian; Venkatasubramanian, Krishna; Sokolsky, Oleg; Lee, Insup (2011). Link Spamming Wikipedia for Profit. 8th Annual Collaboration, Electronic Messaging, Anti-Abuse, and Spam Conference. pp. 152–161. doi:10.1145/2030376.2030394.  ^ Vandalism. Wikipedia. Retrieved November 6, 2012. ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin Wattenberg; Kushal Dave (2004). "Studying Cooperation and Conflict between Authors with History Flow Visualizations" (PDF). Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI). Vienna, Austria: ACM SIGCHI: 575–582. doi:10.1145/985921.985953. ISBN 1-58113-702-8. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 25, 2006. Retrieved January 24, 2007.  ^ Reid Priedhorsky; Jilin Chen; Shyong (Tony) K. Lam; Katherine Panciera; Loren Terveen; John Riedl (November 4, 2007). "Creating, Destroying, and Restoring Value in Wikipedia" (PDF). Association for Computing Machinery GROUP '07 conference proceedings; GroupLens Research, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota. Sanibel Island, Florida. Retrieved October 13, 2007.  ^ a b c d Seigenthaler, John (November 29, 2005). "A False Wikipedia 'biography'". USA Today. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Friedman, Thomas L. (2007). The World is Flat. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. p. 124. ISBN 978-0-374-29278-2.  ^ Buchanan, Brian (November 17, 2006). "Founder shares cautionary tale of libel in cyberspace". archive.firstamendmentcenter.org. Archived from the original on December 21, 2012. Retrieved November 17, 2012.  ^ Helm, Burt (December 13, 2005). "Wikipedia: "A Work in Progress"". BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012. Retrieved July 26, 2012.  ^ "Who's behind Wikipedia?". PC World. February 6, 2008. Archived from the original on February 9, 2008. Retrieved February 7, 2008.  ^ What Wikipedia is not. Retrieved April 1, 2010. "Wikipedia is not a dictionary, usage, or jargon guide." ^ Notability. Retrieved February 13, 2008. "A topic is presumed to be notable if it has received significant coverage in reliable secondary sources that are independent of the subject." ^ No original research. February 13, 2008. "Wikipedia does not publish original thought." ^ Verifiability. February 13, 2008. "Material challenged or likely to be challenged, and all quotations, must be attributed to a reliable, published source." ^ Cohen, Noam (August 9, 2011). "For inclusive mission, Wikipedia is told that written word goes only so far". International Herald Tribune. p. 18. Archived from the original on March 11, 2014 – via vLex. (subscription required) ^ Neutral point of view. February 13, 2008. "All Wikipedia articles and other encyclopedic content must be written from a neutral point of view, representing significant views fairly, proportionately and without bias." ^ Eric Haas (October 26, 2007). "Will Unethical Editing Destroy Wikipedia's Credibility?". AlterNet. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Sanger, Larry (April 18, 2005). "The Early History of Nupedia and Wikipedia: A Memoir". Slashdot. Dice.  ^ Kostakis, Vasilis (March 2010). "Identifying and understanding the problems of Wikipedia's peer governance: The case of inclusionists versus deletionists". First Monday.  ^ Ownership of articles ^ Avoiding Tragedy in the Wiki-Commons, by Andrew George, 12 Va. J.L. & Tech. 8 (2007) ^ Wikipedia:Administrators ^ Mehegan, David (February 13, 2006). "Many contributors, common cause". Boston Globe. Retrieved March 25, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedia:Administrators". Retrieved July 12, 2009.  ^ "Wikipedia:RfA_Review/Reflect". Retrieved September 24, 2009.  ^ Meyer, Robinson (July 16, 2012). "3 Charts That Show How Wikipedia Is Running Out of Admins". The Atlantic. Retrieved September 2, 2012.  ^ Dispute Resolution ^ Coldewey, Devin (June 21, 2012). "Wikipedia is editorial warzone, says study". Technology. NBC News. Retrieved October 29, 2012.  ^ David A. Hoffman; Salil K. Mehra (2009). "Wikitruth through Wikiorder". Emory Law Journal (PDF)|format= requires |url= (help). Emory University School of Law. 59 (1): 181. SSRN 1354424.  ^ David A. Hoffman; Salil K. Mehra (2009). "Wikitruth through Wikiorder". Emory Law Journal (PDF)|format= requires |url= (help). Emory University School of Law. 59 (1): 151–210. SSRN 1354424.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin M. Wattenberg; Jesse Kriss; Frank van Ham (January 3, 2007). "Talk Before You Type: Coordination in Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved June 27, 2008.  ^ Arthur, Charles (December 15, 2005). "Log on and join in, but beware the web cults". The Guardian. London. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Lu Stout, Kristie (August 4, 2003). "Wikipedia: The know-it-all Web site". CNN. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Larry Sanger (December 31, 2004). "Why Wikipedia Must Jettison Its Anti-Elitism". Kuro5hin, Op–Ed. There is a certain mindset associated with unmoderated Usenet groups […] that infects the collectively-managed Wikipedia project: if you react strongly to trolling, that reflects poorly on you, not (necessarily) on the troll. If you […] demand that something be done about constant disruption by trollish behavior, the other listmembers will cry "censorship", attack you, and even come to the defense of the troll. […] The root problem: anti-elitism, or lack of respect for expertise. There is a deeper problem […] which explains both of the above-elaborated problems. Namely, as a community, Wikipedia lacks the habit or tradition of respect for expertise. As a community, far from being elitist, it is anti-elitist (which, in this context, means that expertise is not accorded any special respect, and snubs and disrespect of expertise is tolerated). This is one of my failures: a policy that I attempted to institute in Wikipedia's first year, but for which I did not muster adequate support, was the policy of respecting and deferring politely to experts. (Those who were there will, I hope, remember that I tried very hard.)  ^ T. Kriplean, I. Beschastnikh, et al. (2008). "Articulations of wikiwork: uncovering valued work in Wikipedia through barnstars". Proceedings of the ACM: 47. doi:10.1145/1460563.1460573. ISBN 978-1-60558-007-4.  (Subscription required.) ^ Jean Goodwin (2009). "The Authority of Wikipedia" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on November 22, 2009. Retrieved January 31, 2011. Wikipedia's commitment to anonymity/pseudonymity thus imposes a sort of epistemic agnosticism on its readers  ^ Kittur, Aniket. "Power of the Few vs. Wisdom of the Crowd: Wikipedia and the Rise of the Bourgeoisie" (PDF). Viktoria Institute. Retrieved August 13, 2014.  ^ a b c Blodget, Henry (January 3, 2009). "Who The Hell Writes Wikipedia, Anyway?". Business Insider.  ^ Wilson, Chris (February 22, 2008). "The Wisdom of the Chaperones". Slate. Retrieved August 13, 2014.  ^ Swartz, Aaron (September 4, 2006). "Raw Thought: Who Writes Wikipedia?". Retrieved February 23, 2008.  ^ a b Goldman, Eric. "Wikipedia's Labor Squeeze and its Consequences". 8. Journal on Telecommunications and High Technology Law.  ^ Noveck, Beth Simone. "Wikipedia and the Future of Legal Education". 57. Journal of Legal Education.  ^ "Wikipedia "Good Samaritans" Are on the Money". Scientific American. October 19, 2007. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Yair Amichai–Hamburger, Naama Lamdan, Rinat Madiel, Tsahi Hayat, Personality Characteristics of Wikipedia Members, CyberPsychology & Behavior, December 1, 2008, 11 (6): 679–681; doi:10.1089/cpb.2007.0225. ^ "Wikipedians are 'closed' and 'disagreeable'". New Scientist. Retrieved July 13, 2010.  (Subscription required.) ^ "The Misunderstood Personality Profile of Wikipedia Members". psychologytoday.com. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Giles, Jim (August 4, 2009). "After the boom, is Wikipedia heading for bust?". New Scientist.  ^ "Where Are the Women in Wikipedia? – Room for Debate". NYTimes.com. February 2, 2011. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Lam, Shyong; Anuradha Uduwage; Zhenhua Dong; Shilad Sen; David R. Musicant; Loren Terveen; John Riedl (October 3–5, 2011). "WP:Clubhouse? An Exploration of Wikipedia's Gender Imbalance" (PDF). WikiSym 2011. Retrieved October 28, 2013.  ^ Cohen, Noam. "Define Gender Gap? Look Up Wikipedia's Contributor List". The New York Times. The New York Times Company. Retrieved October 28, 2013.  ^ Chom, Noam (January 31, 2011). "Define Gender Gap? Look Up Wikipedia's Contributor List". The New York Times. p. B–1. Retrieved May 9, 2012.  ^ Basch, Linda (February 6, 2011). "Male-Dominated Web Site Seeking Female Experts" (Letters to the Editor). The New York Times. p. WK–7. Retrieved May 9, 2012.  ^ "OCAD to 'Storm Wikipedia' this fall". CBC News. August 27, 2013. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ Wikimedia Foundation. 2008. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on November 18, 2016. Retrieved December 27, 2016.  ^ "Wikipedia 'completely failed' to fix gender imbalance". BBC News. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Dimitra Kessenides (December 26, 2017). Bloomberg News Weekly, "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". p. 73. ^ "Statistics". English Wikipedia. Retrieved June 21, 2008.  ^ List of Wikipedias ^ "Wikipedia:List of Wikipedias". English Wikipedia. Retrieved April 26, 2017.  ^ List of Wikipedias – Meta ^ "List of Wikipedias". Wikimedia Meta-Wiki. Retrieved 26 April 2017.  ^ "Spelling". Manual of Style. Wikipedia. Retrieved May 19, 2007.  ^ "Countering systemic bias". Retrieved May 19, 2007.  ^ "Fair use". Meta-Wiki. Retrieved July 14, 2007.  ^ "Images on Wikipedia". Retrieved July 14, 2007.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas (January 3, 2007). "The Visual Side of Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved October 30, 2007.  ^ Jimmy Wales, "Wikipedia is an encyclopedia", March 8, 2005, <Wikipedia-l@wikimedia.org> ^ "Meta-Wiki". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 24, 2009.  ^ "Meta-Wiki Statistics". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 24, 2008.  ^ "List of articles every Wikipedia should have". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 24, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia: Translation". English Wikipedia. Retrieved February 3, 2007.  ^ Yasseri, Taha; Sumi, Robert; Kertész, János (January 17, 2012). "Circadian Patterns of Wikipedia Editorial Activity: A Demographic Analysis". PLoS ONE. 7 (1): e30091. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0030091. Retrieved January 17, 2012.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation 2011–12 Annual Plan" (PDF). Wikimedia Foundation. p. 8. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ a b c "The future of Wikipedia: WikiPeaks?". The Economist. March 1, 2014. Retrieved March 11, 2014.  ^ Andrew Lih. Wikipedia. Alternative edit policies at Wikipedia in other languages. ^ Jemielniak, Dariusz (June 22, 2014). "The Unbearable Bureaucracy of Wikipedia". Slate. Retrieved August 18, 2014.  ^ D. Jemielniak, Common Knowledge, Stanford University Press, 2014. ^ Messer-Kruse, Timothy (February 12, 2012) The 'Undue Weight' of Truth on Wikipedia Archived December 18, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. The Chronicle of Higher Education Retrieved March 27, 2014 ^ Colón-Aguirre, Monica &Fleming-May, Rachel A. (October 11, 2012) "You Just Type in What You Are Looking For": Undergraduates' Use of Library Resources vs. Wikipedia Archived April 19, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. (p. 392) The Journal of Academic Librarianship Retrieved March 27, 2014 ^ Bowling Green News (February 27, 2012) Wikipedia experience sparks national debate Archived August 27, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Bowling Green State University Retrieved March 27, 2014 ^ Wisdom? More like dumbness of the crowds | Oliver Kamm – Times Online (archive version 2011-08-14) (Author's own copy Archived September 5, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.) ^ "Plagiarism by Wikipedia editors". Wikipedia Watch. October 27, 2006. Archived from the original on November 25, 2009.  ^ "Wikipedia, Britannica: A Toss-Up". Wired. Associated Press. December 15, 2005. Retrieved August 8, 2015.  ^ Reagle, pp. 165–166. ^ Fatally Flawed: Refuting the recent study on encyclopedic accuracy by the journal Nature Archived July 9, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., Encyclopædia Britannica, March 2006 ^ "Encyclopaedia Britannica and Nature: a response" (PDF). Retrieved July 13, 2010.  ^ "Nature's responses to Encyclopaedia Britannica". Nature. March 30, 2006. Retrieved March 19, 2012.  ^ See author acknowledged comments in response to the citation of the Nature study, at PLoS One, 2014, "Citation of fundamentally flawed Nature quality 'study' ", In response to T. Yasseri et al. (2012) Dynamics of Conflicts in Wikipedia, Published June 20, 2012, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0038869, see "Archived copy". Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2014. , accessed July 21, 2014. ^ "Wikipedia:General disclaimer". English Wikipedia. Retrieved April 22, 2008.  ^ Public Information Research, Wikipedia Watch ^ Raphel, JR. "The 15 Biggest Wikipedia Blunders". PC World. Retrieved September 2, 2009.  ^ Cowen, Tyler (March 14, 2008). "Cooked Books". The New Republic. Archived from the original on March 18, 2008. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Stacy Schiff (July 31, 2006). "Know It All". The New Yorker.  ^ Danah Boyd (January 4, 2005). "Academia and Wikipedia". Many 2 Many: A Group Weblog on Social Software. Corante. Retrieved December 18, 2008. [The author, Danah Boyd, describes herself as] an expert on social media[,] […] a doctoral student in the School of Information at the University of California, Berkeley [,] and a fellow at the Harvard University Berkman Center for Internet & Society [at Harvard Law School.]  ^ Robert McHenry, "The Faith-Based Encyclopedia" Archived January 16, 2006, at the Wayback Machine., Tech Central Station, November 15, 2004. ^ "Inside Wikipedia – Attack of the PR Industry". Deutsche Welle. June 30, 2014. Retrieved July 2, 2014.  ^ "Toward a New Compendium of Knowledge (longer version)". Citizendium. Archived from the original on October 11, 2006. Retrieved October 10, 2006.  ^ a b Elder, Jeff (June 16, 2014). "Wikipedia Strengthens Rules Against Undisclosed Editing". The Wall Street Journal.  ^ Ahrens, Frank (July 9, 2006). "Death by Wikipedia: The Kenneth Lay Chronicles". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 1, 2006.  ^ Kane, Margaret (January 30, 2006). "Politicians notice Wikipedia". CNET. Retrieved January 28, 2007.  ^ Bergstein, Brian (January 23, 2007). "Microsoft offers cash for Wikipedia edit". MSNBC. Retrieved February 1, 2007.  ^ Hafner, Katie (August 19, 2007). "Lifting Corporate Fingerprints From the Editing of Wikipedia". The New York Times. p. 1. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ a b Stephen Colbert (July 30, 2006). "Wikiality". Retrieved October 8, 2015.  ^ "Wide World of Wikipedia". The Emory Wheel. April 21, 2006. Archived from the original on November 7, 2007. Retrieved October 17, 2007.  ^ Waters, N. L. (2007). "Why you can't cite Wikipedia in my class". Communications of the ACM. 50 (9): 15. doi:10.1145/1284621.1284635.  ^ Jaschik, Scott (January 26, 2007). "A Stand Against Wikipedia". Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved January 27, 2007.  ^ Helm, Burt (December 14, 2005). "Wikipedia: 'A Work in Progress'". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on April 21, 2012. Retrieved January 29, 2007.  ^ "Jimmy Wales", Biography Resource Center Online. (Gale, 2006.) ^ Child, Maxwell L., "Professors Split on Wiki Debate" Archived December 20, 2008, at the Wayback Machine., The Harvard Crimson, Monday, February 26, 2007. ^ Chloe Stothart. "Web threatens learning ethos" Archived December 21, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.. The Times Higher Education Supplement, 2007, 1799 (June 22), p. 2. ^ Cohen, Morris; Olson, Kent (2010). Legal Research in a Nutshell (10th ed.). St. Paul, Minnesota, USA: Thomson Reuters. pp. 32–34. ISBN 978-0-314-26408-4.  ^ a b Julie Beck. "Doctors' #1 Source for Healthcare Information: Wikipedia". The Atlantic, March 5, 2014. ^ a b Green, Emma (May 7, 2014). "Can Wikipedia Ever Be a Definitive Medical Text? – Julie Beck". The Atlantic. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Kittur, Aniket; Kraut, Robert E. (2008). "Harnessing the wisdom of crowds in Wikipedia: quality through coordination". Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work. New York: ACM. pp. 37–46. doi:10.1145/1460563.1460572. ISBN 978-1-60558-007-4. [permanent dead link] ^ a b Roy Rosenzweig (June 2006). "Can History be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the Past". The Journal of American History. 93 (1): 117–146. doi:10.2307/4486062. JSTOR 4486062. Archived from the original on April 25, 2010. Retrieved August 11, 2006.  (Center for History and New Media.) ^ Andrew Orlowski (October 18, 2005). "Wikipedia founder admits to serious quality problems". The Register. Retrieved September 30, 2007.  ^ "Cancer information on Wikipedia is accurate, but not very readable, study finds". Science Daily. June 2, 2010. Retrieved December 31, 2010.  ^ "Fact or fiction? Wikipedia's variety of contributors is not only a strength". The Economist. March 10, 2007. Retrieved December 31, 2010.  ^ Wikipedia:PAPER ^ "The battle for Wikipedia's soul". The Economist. March 6, 2008. Retrieved March 7, 2008.  ^ Douglas, Ian (November 10, 2007). "Wikipedia: an online encyclopedia torn apart". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved November 23, 2010.  ^ Sophie Taylor (April 5, 2008). "China allows access to English Wikipedia". Reuters. Retrieved July 29, 2008.  ^ Bruilliard, Karin (May 21, 2010). "Pakistan blocks YouTube a day after shutdown of Facebook over Muhammad issue". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 24, 2011.  ^ "Wikipedia child image censored". BBC News. December 8, 2008. Retrieved December 8, 2008.  ^ a b Kittur, A., Chi, E. H., and Suh, B. 2009. What's in Wikipedia? Mapping Topics and Conflict Using Socially Annotated Category Structure Archived April 13, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. In Proceedings of the 27th international Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Boston, Massachusetts, USA, April 4–9, 2009). CHI '09. ACM, New York, USA, 1509–1512. ^ Petrusich, Amanda (October 20, 2011). "Wikipedia's Deep Dive Into a Library Collection". The New York Times. Retrieved October 28, 2011.  ^ Lam, Shyong; Anuradha Uduwage; Zhenhua Dong; Shilad Sen; David R. Musicant; Loren Terveen; John Riedl (October 3–5, 2011). "WP: Clubhouse? An Exploration of Wikipedia's Gender Imblance" (PDF). WikiSym 2011: 4.  ^ Mark Graham, Mapping the Geographies of Wikipedia Content, Zerogeography.net (November 12, 2009). ^ The Guardian 2014 (London) The Guardian view on Wikipedia: evolving truth Archived November 12, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. ^ a b Quilter, Laura (October 24, 2012). "Systemic Bias in Wikipedia: What It Looks Like, and How to Deal with It". University of Massachusetts – Amherst. Retrieved November 26, 2012.  ^ "Edit Wars Reveal the 10 Most Controversial Topics on Wikipedia[permanent dead link]", MIT Technology Review, July 17, 2013. ^ a b c "The Most Controversial Topics in Wikipedia: A Multilingual and Geographical Analysis by Taha Yasseri, Anselm Spoerri, Mark Graham, Janos Kertesz :: SSRN". Papers.ssrn.com. May 23, 2013. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2269392. SSRN 2269392.  Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ Das, Sanmay; Allen, Lavoie; Malik, Magdon-Ismail (November 1, 2013). "Manipulation among the arbiters of collective intelligence: How Wikipedia administrators mold public opinion". CIKM '13 Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on Information & Knowledge Management. San Francisco, California, USA: ACM. pp. 1097–1106. doi:10.1145/2505515.2505566. ISBN 978-1-4503-2263-8.  ^ Das, Sanmay; Allen, Lavoie; Malik, Magdon-Ismail (December 24, 2016). "Manipulation among the arbiters of collective intelligence: How Wikipedia administrators mold public opinion.". ACM Transactions on the Web. New York, NY, USA: ACM. 10 (4): 24. doi:10.1145/3001937.  ^ a b Dimitra Kessenides (December 22, 2016). "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". Bloomberg News Weekly. p. 72. Retrieved December 26, 2016.  ^ Sanger, Larry. "What should we do about Wikipedia's porn problem?". Retrieved July 26, 2012.  ^ Metz, Cade (December 7, 2008). "Brit ISPs censor Wikipedia over 'child porn' album cover". The Register. Retrieved May 10, 2009.  ^ Raphael, JR (December 10, 2008). "Wikipedia Censorship Sparks Free Speech Debate". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 10, 2009.  ^ Farrell, Nick (April 29, 2010). "Wikipedia denies child abuse allegations: Co-founder grassed the outfit to the FBI". The Inquirer. Retrieved October 9, 2010.  ^ a b Metz, Cade (April 9, 2010). "Wikifounder reports Wikiparent to FBI over 'child porn'". The Register. Retrieved April 19, 2010.  ^ "Wikipedia blasts co-founder's accusations of child porn on website". The Economic Times. India. April 29, 2010. Retrieved April 29, 2010.  ^ a b "Wikipedia blasts talk of child porn at website". Agence France-Presse. April 28, 2010. Retrieved April 29, 2010.  ^ "Wikimedia pornography row deepens as Wales cedes rights". BBC News. May 10, 2010. Retrieved May 19, 2010.  ^ Gray, Lila (September 17, 2013). "Wikipedia Gives Porn a Break". XBIZ.com. Retrieved November 10, 2013.  ^ Andrew McStay, 2014, Privacy and Philosophy: New Media and Affective Protocol Archived April 14, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., New York Peter Lang. ^ Heise – Gericht weist einstweilige Verfügung gegen Wikimedia Deutschland ab (update), by Torsten Kleinz, February 9, 2006. ^ "IT Service Management Software". OTRS.com. Retrieved June 9, 2012.  ^ Paling, Emma. "Wikipedia's Hostility to Women". The Atlantic. Retrieved October 24, 2015.  ^ Auerbach, David. "Encyclopedia Frown". Slate. Retrieved October 24, 2015.  ^ "In UK, rising chorus of outrage over online misogyny". CSMonitor.com.  ^ Paling, Emma (October 21, 2015). "Wikipedia's Hostility to Women". The Atlantic. Retrieved December 10, 2016.  ^ Ayers, Phoebe (2008). How Wikipedia Works. San Francisco: No Starch Press. p. 213. ISBN 1-59327-176-X.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation – Financial Statements – June 30, 2011 and 2010" (PDF). Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation IRS Form 990" (PDF). Retrieved October 14, 2014.  ^ "Press releases/WMF announces new ED Lila Tretikov". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ a b Jeff Elder, The Wall Street Journal, May 1, 2014, "Wikipedia's New Chief: From Soviet Union to World's Sixth-Largest Site". ^ a b Naom Cohen (May 1, 2014). "Media: Open-Source Software Specialist Selected as Executive Director of Wikipedia". The New York Times.  ^ Dimitra Kessenides. Bloomberg News Weekly. December 26, 2016. "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". ^ Dimitra Kessenides. Bloomberg News Weekly. December 26, 2016, p. 74. "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". ^ Mark Bergsma. "Wikimedia Architecture" (PDF). Wikimedia Foundation. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 3, 2009. Retrieved June 27, 2008.  ^ "Version: Installed extensions". . Retrieved August 18, 2014. ^ Michael Snow. "Lucene search: Internal search function returns to service". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved February 26, 2009.  ^ Brion Vibber. "[Wikitech-l] Lucene search". Retrieved February 26, 2009.  ^ "Extension:Lucene-search". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved August 31, 2009.  ^ "mediawiki – Revision 55688: /branches/lucene-search-2.1/lib". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved August 31, 2009.  ^ Emil Protalinski (July 2, 2013). "Wikimedia rolls out WYSIWYG visual editor for logged-in users accessing Wikipedia articles in English". The Next Web. Retrieved July 6, 2013.  ^ Curtis, Sophie (July 23, 2013). "Wikipedia introduces new features to entice editors". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved August 18, 2013.  ^ L.M. (December 13, 2011). "Changes at Wikipedia: Seeing things". The Economist. Retrieved July 28, 2013.  ^ Lucian Parfeni (July 2, 2013). "Wikipedia's New VisualEditor Is the Best Update in Years and You Can Make It Better". Softpedia. Retrieved July 30, 2013.  ^ a b Orlowski, Andrew (August 1, 2013). "Wikipedians say no to Jimmy's 'buggy' WYSIWYG editor". The Register. Retrieved August 18, 2013.  ^ Wikipedia Bot Information ^ a b Daniel Nasaw (July 24, 2012). "Meet the 'bots' that edit Wikipedia". BBC News.  ^ Halliday, Josh; Arthur, Charles (July 26, 2012). "Boot up: The Wikipedia vandalism police, Apple analysts, and more". The Guardian. Retrieved September 5, 2012.  ^ Jervell, Ellen Emmerentze (July 13, 2014). "For This Author, 10,000 Wikipedia Articles Is a Good Day's Work". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 18, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia signpost: Abuse Filter is enabled". English Wikipedia. March 23, 2009. Retrieved July 13, 2010.  ^ Aljazeera, July 21, 2014, "MH17 Wikipedia entry edited from Russian Government IP Address". "Archived copy". Archived from the original on November 16, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2014.  ^ Wikipedia's policy on bots ^ Andrew Lih (2009). The Wikipedia Revolution, chapter Then came the Bots, pp. 99–106. ^ "Wikipedia: Wikiprojects". Retrieved 16 March 2015.  ^ "Wikipedia:Version 1.0 Editorial Team/Assessment". Retrieved 28 October 2007.  ^ "Comparing featured article groups and revision patterns correlations in Wikipedia". First Monday. Retrieved 13 July 2010.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin Wattenberg; Matthew M. McKeon (22 July 2007). "The Hidden Order of Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved 30 October 2007.  ^ Poderi, Giacomo, Wikipedia and the Featured Articles: How a Technological System Can Produce Best Quality Articles, Master thesis, University of Maastricht, October 2008. ^ Lindsey, David (5 April 2010). "Evaluating quality control of Wikipedia's featured articles". First Monday. 15 (4). Retrieved 29 January 2017.  ^ a b Wikipedia:Version 1.0 Editorial Team/Statistics – Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia ^ "Monthly request statistics", Wikimedia. Retrieved October 31, 2008.[dead link] ^ Domas Mituzas. "Wikipedia: Site internals, configuration, code examples and management issues" (PDF). MySQL Users Conference 2007. Retrieved June 27, 2008.  ^ Guido Urdaneta, Guillaume Pierre and Maarten van Steen. "Wikipedia Workload Analysis for Decentralized Hosting". Elsevier Computer Networks 53 (11), pp. 1830–1845, June 2009. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Weiss, Todd R. (October 9, 2008). "Wikipedia simplifies IT infrastructure by moving to one Linux vendor". Computerworld. Retrieved November 1, 2008.  ^ Paul, Ryan (October 9, 2008). "Wikipedia adopts Ubuntu for its server infrastructure". Ars Technica. Retrieved November 1, 2008.  ^ "Server roles at wikitech.wikimedia.org". Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved December 8, 2009.  ^ Palmier, Guillaume. "Wikimedia sites to move to primary data center in Ashburn, Virginia". WMF. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Verge, Jason. "It's Official: Ashburn is Wikipedia's New Home". Data Center Knowledge. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Frederic M. Scherer and David Ross, [1970] 1990. Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance, 3rd ed. Houghton-Mifflin. Description Archived May 3, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. and 1st ed. review extract[dead link].    • Google Scholar search of Frederic M. Scherer ^ a b c Patents, Citations, and Innovations, by Adam B. Jaffe, Manuel Trajtenberg, pp. 89–153. ^ Cohen, Noam (March 5, 2007). "A Contributor to Wikipedia Has His Fictional Side". The New York Times. Retrieved October 18, 2008.  ^ Wikipedia:Copyrights ^ Walter Vermeir (2007). "Resolution:License update". Wikizine. Retrieved December 4, 2007.  ^ Wikimedia ^ "Licensing update/Questions and Answers". Wikimedia Meta. Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved February 15, 2009.  ^ "Licensing_update/Timeline". Wikimedia Meta. Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved April 5, 2009.  ^ "Wikimedia community approves license migration". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved May 21, 2009.  ^ Cohen, Noam (July 19, 2009). "Wikipedia May Be a Font of Facts, but It's a Desert for Photos". New York Times. Retrieved March 9, 2013.  ^ "Wikipedia cleared in French defamation case". Reuters. November 2, 2007. Retrieved November 2, 2007.  ^ Anderson, Nate (May 2, 2008). "Dumb idea: suing Wikipedia for calling you "dumb"". Ars Technica. Retrieved May 4, 2008.  ^ "With Bing Reference". Archived from the original on March 8, 2013. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia on DVD" Archived June 3, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.. Linterweb. Retrieved June 1, 2007. "Linterweb is authorized to make a commercial use of the Wikipedia trademark restricted to the selling of the Encyclopedia CDs and DVDs". ^ "Wikipedia 0.5 Available on a CD-ROM" Archived May 3, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.. Wikipedia on DVD. Linterweb. "The DVD or CD-ROM version 0.5 was commercially available for purchase." Retrieved June 1, 2007. ^ "Polish Wikipedia on DVD". Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia:DVD". Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "CDPedia (Python Argentina)". Retrieved July 7, 2011.  ^ Wikipedia CD Selection. Retrieved September 8, 2009. ^ "Wikipedia turned into book". The Daily Telegraph. London: Telegraph Media Group. June 16, 2009. Archived from the original on September 9, 2009. Retrieved September 8, 2009.  ^ "Wikipedia Selection for Schools". Retrieved July 14, 2012.  ^ Thiel, Thomas (September 27, 2010). "Wikipedia und Amazon: Der Marketplace soll es richten". Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (in German). Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung. Archived from the original on November 26, 2010. Retrieved December 6, 2010.  ^ Wikipedia policies on data download ^ Data dumps: Downloading Images, Wikimedia Meta-Wiki ^ "Wikipedia Reference Desk". Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Brad Stone, "How Google's Android chief, Sundar Pichai, became the most powerful man in mobile", June 30 – July 6, 2014, Bloomberg BusinessWeek, pp. 47–51. ^ "Wikipedia – Android Apps on Google Play". Play.Google.com. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia Mobile on the App Store on iTunes". iTunes.Apple.com. August 4, 2014. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ "Wikimedia Mobile is Officially Launched". Wikimedia Technical Blog. June 30, 2009. Retrieved July 22, 2009.  ^ "Local Points Of Interest In Wikipedia". May 15, 2011. Retrieved May 15, 2011.  ^ "iPhone Gems: Wikipedia Apps". November 30, 2008. Retrieved July 22, 2008.  ^ Ellis, Justin (January 17, 2013). "Wikipedia plans to expand mobile access around the globe with new funding". NiemanLab. Nieman Journalism Lab. Retrieved April 22, 2013.  ^ Andrew Lih (June 20, 2015). "Can Wikipedia Survive?".  ^ Andrew Brown (June 25, 2015). "Wikipedia editors are a dying breed. The reason? Mobile". The Guardian.  ^ "Wikipedia:Modelling Wikipedia's growth". Retrieved December 22, 2007.  ^ "694 Million People Currently Use the Internet Worldwide According To comScore Networks". comScore. May 4, 2006. Archived from the original on July 30, 2008. Retrieved December 16, 2007. Wikipedia has emerged as a site that continues to increase in popularity, both globally and in the US  ^ "Google Traffic To Wikipedia up 166% Year over Year". Hitwise. February 16, 2007. Retrieved December 22, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedia and Academic Research". Hitwise. October 17, 2006. Retrieved February 6, 2008.  ^ West, Stuart. "Wikipedia's Evolving Impact: slideshow presentation at TED2010" (PDF). Retrieved October 23, 2015.  ^ Rainie, Lee; Bill Tancer (December 15, 2007). "Wikipedia users" (PDF). Pew Internet & American Life Project. Pew Research Center. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 6, 2008. Retrieved December 15, 2007. 36% of online American adults consult Wikipedia. It is particularly popular with the well-educated and current college-age students.  ^ SAI (October 7, 2011). "The World's Most Valuable Startups". Business Insider. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ "Research:Wikipedia Readership Survey 2011/Results – Meta". Wikimedia. February 6, 2012. Retrieved April 16, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia:Wikipedia in the media". Wikipedia. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Bourgeois et al. v. Peters et al." (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on February 3, 2007. Retrieved February 6, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedian Justice" (PDF)|format= requires |url= (help). SSRN 1346311.  Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ "LEGISinfo – House Government Bill C-38 (38–1)". Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Arias, Martha L. (January 29, 2007). "Wikipedia: The Free Online Encyclopedia and its Use as Court Source". Internet Business Law Services. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  (The name "World Intellectual Property Office" should however read "World Intellectual Property Organization" in this source.) ^ Cohen, Noam (January 29, 2007). "Courts Turn to Wikipedia, but Selectively". The New York Times. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Aftergood, Steven (March 21, 2007). "The Wikipedia Factor in US Intelligence". Federation of American Scientists Project on Government Secrecy. Retrieved April 14, 2007.  ^ Butler, Declan (December 16, 2008). "Publish in Wikipedia or perish". Nature News. doi:10.1038/news.2008.1312.  ^ Shaw, Donna (February–March 2008). "Wikipedia in the Newsroom". American Journalism Review. Retrieved February 11, 2008.  ^ Lexington (September 24, 2011). "Classlessness in America: The uses and abuses of an enduring myth". The Economist. Retrieved September 27, 2011. Socialist Labour Party of America […] though it can trace its history as far back as 1876, when it was known as the Workingmen's Party, no less an authority than Wikipedia pronounces it "moribund".  ^ "Shizuoka newspaper plagiarized Wikipedia article". Japan News Review. July 5, 2007.  ^ "Express-News staffer resigns after plagiarism in column is discovered" at the Wayback Machine (archived October 15, 2007), San Antonio Express-News, January 9, 2007. ^ Frank Bridgewater. "Inquiry prompts reporter's dismissal". Honolulu Star-Bulletin. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Grossman, Lev (December 13, 2006). "Time's Person of the Year: You". Time. Time. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Radio 4 documentary, BBC". 2007. Retrieved April 24, 2016.  ^ "Comunicato stampa. On. Franco Grillini. Wikipedia. Interrogazione a Rutelli. Con "diritto di panorama" promuovere arte e architettura contemporanea italiana. Rivedere con urgenza legge copyright" [Press release. Honorable Franco Grillini. Wikipedia. Interview with Rutelli about the "right to view" promoting contemporary art and architecture of Italy. Review with urgency copyright law] (in Italian). October 12, 2007. Archived from the original on March 30, 2009. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Jose Antonio Vargas (September 17, 2007). "On Wikipedia, Debating 2008 Hopefuls' Every Facet". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Jennifer Ablan (October 22, 2007). "Wikipedia page the latest status symbol". Reuters. Retrieved October 24, 2007.  ^ Witzleb, Normann (2009). "Engaging with the World: Students of Comparative Law Write for Wikipedia". 19 (1 and 2). Legal Education Review: 83–98.  ^ "AI Research Trends". One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI100). Stanford University. Retrieved September 3, 2016.  ^ "Trophy box", Meta-Wiki (March 28, 2005). ^ "Webby Awards 2004". The International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences. 2004. Archived from the original on July 22, 2011.  ^ Zumpano, Anthony (January 29, 2007). "Similar Search Results: Google Wins". Interbrand. Archived from the original on February 20, 2007. Retrieved January 28, 2007.  ^ "Die Quadriga – Award 2008". Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Erasmus Prize – Praemium Erasmianum". Praemium Erasmianum Foundation. Retrieved January 15, 2015.  ^ "Premio Princesa de Asturias de Cooperación Internacional 2015". Fundación Princesa de Asturias. Retrieved June 17, 2015.  ^ "Los fundadores de Wikipedia destacan la versión en asturiano" [The founders of Wikipedia highlight the Asturian version] (in Spanish). La Nueva España. Retrieved October 20, 2015.  ^ "Wikipedia Celebrates 750 Years Of American Independence". The Onion. July 26, 2006. Retrieved October 15, 2006.  ^ "'L.A. Law' Wikipedia Page Viewed 874 Times Today". The Onion. November 24, 2010.  ^ "The Office: The Negotiation, 3.19". April 5, 2007. Retrieved December 27, 2014.  ^ "'Office' fans, inspired by Michael Scott, flock to edit Wikipedia". USA Today. April 12, 2007. Retrieved December 12, 2014.  ^ Bakken, Janae. "My Number One Doctor"; Scrubs; ABC; December 6, 2007. ^ "Professor Wikipedia – CollegeHumor Video". CollegeHumor. November 17, 2009. Retrieved April 19, 2011.  ^ "Dilbert comic strip for 05/08/2009 from the official Dilbert comic strips archive". Universal Uclick. May 8, 2009. Retrieved March 10, 2013.  ^ "Interview With Nick Doody and Matt Kirshen". British Comedy Guide. Retrieved July 31, 2009.  ^ "Your Wikipedia Entries". Tosh.0. February 3, 2010. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia Updates". Tosh.0. February 3, 2010. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Emily Flake (August 23, 2013). "Manning/Wikipedia cartoon". Retrieved August 26, 2013.  ^ "The obstacles to reforming our prisons – The Times". thetimes.co.uk. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ "john julius norwich -Search – The Times". thetimes.co.uk. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ "Announcement of Wiktionary's creation". meta.wikimedia.org. Retrieved July 14, 2012.  ^ "Our projects", Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved January 24, 2007. ^ Bosman, Julie. "After 244 Years, Encyclopaedia Britannica Stops the Presses". The New York Times. Retrieved January 26, 2015.  ^ "Encyclopedia Britannica Dies At The Hands Of Wikipedia, Gizmocrazed.com (with statista infographic from NYTimes.com)". Gizmocrazed.com. March 20, 2012. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Christopher Caldwell (June 14, 2013). "A chapter in the Enlightenment closes". ft.com. Retrieved June 15, 2013. Bertelsmann did not resort to euphemism this week when it announced the end of the Brockhaus encyclopedia brand. Brockhaus had been publishing reference books for two centuries when the media group bought it in 2008. […] The internet has finished off Brockhaus altogether. […] What Germans like is Wikipedia.  ^ "The amorality of Web 2.0". Rough Type. October 3, 2005. Retrieved July 15, 2006.  ^ "Technical solutions: Wisdom of the crowds". Nature. Retrieved October 10, 2006.  ^ Alison Flood. "Alison Flood: Should traditional biography be buried alongside Shakespeare's breakfast?". The Guardian. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Rada Mihalcea and Andras Csomai (2007). Wikify! Linking Documents to Encyclopedic Knowledge Archived February 18, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. Proc. CIKM. ^ David Milne and Ian H. Witten (2008). Learning to link with Wikipedia. Proc. CIKM. ^ Sisay Fissaha Adafre and [Maarten de Rijke] (2005). Discovering missing links in Wikipedia Archived July 17, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.. Proc. LinkKDD. ^ "Wikipedia-Mining Algorithm Reveals World's Most Influential Universities: An algorithm's list of the most influential universities contains some surprising entries.". MIT Technology Review. December 7, 2015. Retrieved December 27, 2015.  ^ Marmow Shaw, Jessica (December 10, 2015). "Harvard is only the 3rd most influential university in the world, according to this list". MarketWatch. Retrieved December 27, 2015.  ^ a b Bothwell, Ellie (December 15, 2015). "Wikipedia Ranking of World Universities: the top 100. List ranks institutions by search engine results and Wikipedia appearances". Times Higher Education. Retrieved December 27, 2015.  ^ Heart Internet. "Website discussing the emulator of the Domesday Project User Interface". Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Frauenfelder, Mark (November 21, 2000). "The next generation of online encyclopedias". CNN.com. Archived from the original on August 14, 2004.  ^ The Free Encyclopedia Project gnu.org (Archived January 3, 2012, at WebCite) ^ Orlowski, Andrew (September 18, 2006). "Wikipedia founder forks Wikipedia, More experts, less fiddling?". The Register. Retrieved June 27, 2007. Larry Sanger describes the Citizendium project as a "progressive or gradual fork", with the major difference that experts have the final say over edits.  ^ Lyman, Jay (September 20, 2006). "Wikipedia Co-Founder Planning New Expert-Authored Site". LinuxInsider. Retrieved June 27, 2007.  Notes ^ Many (but not all) of the glyphs featured are equivalent to the English letter W or sounds "wi", "wo" or "wa". See Wikipedia logo. ^ Registration is required for certain tasks such as editing protected pages, creating pages in the English Wikipedia, and uploading files. ^ For a user to be considered active in a given month, one or more actions have had to be made in said month. ^ Wikis are a type of website. The word "wiki" itself is from the Hawaiian word for "quick".[14] ^ As of 19:59, Wednesday, April 26, 2017 (UTC) ^ The procrastination principle dictates that you should wait for problems to arise before solving them. ^ Revisions with libelous content, criminal threats, or copyright infringements may be removed completely. ^ See for example the Biographies of Living Persons Noticeboard or Neutral Point of View Noticeboard, created to address content falling under their respective areas. ^ See "Libel" by David McHam for the legal distinction Further reading Academic studies Main article: Academic studies about Wikipedia Leitch, Thomas. Wikipedia U: Knowledge, authority, and a liberal education in the digital age (2014) Jensen, Richard. "Military History on the Electronic Frontier: Wikipedia Fights the War of 1812", The Journal of Military History 76#4 (October 2012): 523–556; online version. Yasseri, Taha; Robert Sumi; János Kertész (2012). Szolnoki, Attila, ed. "Circadian Patterns of Wikipedia Editorial Activity: A Demographic Analysis". PLoS ONE. 7 (1): e30091. arXiv:1109.1746. Bibcode:2012PLoSO...7E0091Y. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0030091. PMC 3260192. PMID 22272279.  Goldman, Eric (2010). "Wikipedia's Labor Squeeze and its Consequences". Journal of Telecommunications and High Technology Law. 8. SSRN 1458162#.  (A blog post by the author.) Nielsen, Finn (August 2007). "Scientific Citations in Wikipedia". First Monday. 12 (8). doi:10.5210/fm.v12i8.1997. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Pfeil, Ulrike; Panayiotis Zaphiris; Chee Siang Ang (2006). "Cultural Differences in Collaborative Authoring of Wikipedia". Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication. 12 (1): 88. doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2006.00316.x. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  Priedhorsky, Reid, Jilin Chen, Shyong (Tony) K. Lam, Katherine Panciera, Loren Terveen, and John Riedl. "Creating, Destroying, and Restoring Value in Wikipedia". Proc. GROUP 2007; doi:10.1145/1316624.1316663 Reagle, Joseph (2007). Do as I Do: Authorial Leadership in Wikipedia (PDF). WikiSym '07: Proceedings of the 2007 International Symposium on Wikis. Montreal, Canada: ACM. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  Rosenzweig, Roy. Can History be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the Past. (Originally published in The Journal of American History 93.1 (June 2006): 117–46.) Wilkinson, Dennis M.; Bernardo A. Huberman (April 2007). "Assessing the Value of Cooperation in Wikipedia". First Monday. 12 (4). doi:10.5210/fm.v12i4.1763. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Aaron Halfaker; R. Stuart Geiger; Jonathan T. Morgan; John Riedl (2012). "The Rise and Decline of an Open Collaboration Community". American Behavioral Scientist. 57 (5): 664. doi:10.1177/0002764212469365. Retrieved August 30, 2012.  Books Main article: List of books about Wikipedia Ayers, Phoebe; Matthews, Charles; Yates, Ben (September 2008). How Wikipedia Works: And How You Can Be a Part of It. San Francisco: No Starch Press. ISBN 978-1-59327-176-3.  Broughton, John (2008). Wikipedia – The Missing Manual. O'Reilly Media. ISBN 0-596-51516-2.  (See book review by Baker, as listed hereafter.) Broughton, John (2008). Wikipedia Reader's Guide. Sebastopol: Pogue Press. ISBN 0-596-52174-X.  Dalby, Andrew (2009). The World and Wikipedia: How We are Editing Reality. Siduri. ISBN 978-0-9562052-0-9.  Jemielniak, Dariusz (2014). Common Knowledge? An Ethnography of Wikipedia. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press. ISBN 9780804789448.  Keen, Andrew (2007). The Cult of the Amateur. Doubleday/Currency. ISBN 978-0-385-52080-5.  (Substantial criticisms of Wikipedia and other web 2.0 projects.) Listen to: Keen, Andrew (June 16, 2007). "Does the Internet Undermine Culture?". National Public Radio, USA.  The NPR interview with A. Keen, Weekend Edition Saturday, June 16, 2007. Lih, Andrew (2009). The Wikipedia Revolution: How a Bunch of Nobodies Created the World's Greatest Encyclopedia. New York: Hyperion. ISBN 978-1-4013-0371-6.  O'Sullivan, Dan (September 24, 2009). Wikipedia: a new community of practice?. Ashgate Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7546-7433-7.  Sheizaf Rafaeli & Yaron Ariel (2008). "Online motivational factors: Incentives for participation and contribution in Wikipedia." In Barak, A. Psychological aspects of cyberspace: Theory, research, applications. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp. 243–267.  Reagle, Joseph Michael Jr. (2010). Good Faith Collaboration: The Culture of Wikipedia. Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA: the MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-01447-2. Retrieved October 25, 2015.  Wells, Herbert George. (2013). World Brain. New Delhi, India: Isha Books (reprint). ISBN 978-9-333-39061-3. Retrieved June 18, 2016.  Book reviews and other articles Baker, Nicholson. "The Charms of Wikipedia". The New York Review of Books, March 20, 2008. Retrieved December 17, 2008. (Book rev. of The Missing Manual, by John Broughton, as listed previously.) Crovitz, L. Gordon. "Wikipedia's Old-Fashioned Revolution: The online encyclopedia is fast becoming the best." (Originally published in Wall Street Journal online – April 6, 2009.) Postrel, Virginia, "Who Killed Wikipedia? : A hardened corps of volunteer editors is the only force protecting Wikipedia. They might also be killing it", Pacific Standard magazine, November/December 2014 issue. Learning resources Wikiversity list of learning resources. (Includes related courses, Web-based seminars, slides, lecture notes, text books, quizzes, glossaries, etc.) The Great Book of Knowledge, Part 1: A Wiki is a Kind of Bus, Ideas, with Paul Kennedy, CBC Radio One, originally broadcast January 15, 2014. Webpage includes a link to the archived audio program (also found here). The radio documentary discusses Wikipedia's history, development and its place within the broader scope of the trend to democratized knowledge. It also includes interviews with several key Wikipedia staff and contributors, including Kat Walsh and Sue Gardner (audio, 53:58, Flash required). Other media coverage See also: List of films about Wikipedia "See Who's Editing Wikipedia – Diebold, the CIA, a Campaign", WIRED, August 14, 2007. Balke, Jeff (March 2008). "For Music Fans: Wikipedia; MySpace". Houston Chronicle. Broken Record (blog). Retrieved December 17, 2008.  Dee, Jonathan (July 1, 2007). "All the News That's Fit to Print Out". The New York Times Magazine. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Giles, Jim (September 20, 2007). "Wikipedia 2.0 – Now with Added Trust". New Scientist. Retrieved January 14, 2008.  Miliard, Mike (December 2, 2007). "Wikipedia Rules". The Phoenix. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Poe, Marshall (September 1, 2006). "The Hive". The Atlantic Monthly. Retrieved March 22, 2008.  Rosenwald, Michael S. (October 23, 2009). "Gatekeeper of D.C.'s entry: Road to city's Wikipedia page goes through a DuPont Circle bedroom". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 22, 2009.  Runciman, David (May 28, 2009). "Like Boiling a Frog". London Review of Books. Retrieved June 3, 2009.  Taylor, Chris (May 29, 2005). "It's a Wiki, Wiki World". Time. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  "Technological Quarterly: Brain Scan: The Free-knowledge Fundamentalist". The Economist Web and Print. June 5, 2008. Retrieved June 5, 2008. Jimmy Wales changed the world with Wikipedia, the hugely popular online encyclopedia that anyone can edit. What will he do next?  "Is Wikipedia Cracking Up?" The Independent, February 3, 2009. "Wikipedia probe into paid-for 'sockpuppet' entries", BBC News', October 21, 2013. "The Decline of Wikipedia", MIT Technology Review, October 22, 2013 Edits to Wikipedia pages on Bell, Garner, Diallo traced to 1 Police Plaza (March 2015), Capital Angola's Wikipedia Pirates Are Exposing Problems (March 2016), Motherboard Dark Side of Wikipedia at the Wayback Machine (archived August 4, 2016) Full Measure with Sharyl Attkinson, April 17, 2016. (Includes video.) Wales, Jimmy (December 9, 2016). "How Wikipedia Works". cato.org. Cato Institute. Jimmy Wales, founder of Wikipedia, discusses the site, how it’s treated by governments, and how it’s fueled by its users.  External links Find more aboutWikipediaat Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Travel guide from Wikivoyage Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Discussion from Meta-Wiki Documentation from MediaWiki Official website (Mobile) – multilingual portal (contains links to all language editions) (wikipedia.com still redirects here) Wikipedia at DMOZ Wikitrends: Wikipedia articles most visited today "Wikipedia collected news and commentary". The Guardian.  Wikipedia topic page at The New York Times Video of TED talk by Jimmy Wales on the birth of Wikipedia v t e Wikipedia Overview Purpose Censorship Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Deletionism and inclusionism Gender bias Racial bias MediaWiki Notability Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators Arbitration Committee Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wikipedian in residence Wikimania People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Larry Sanger Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikipedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Internet Watch Foundation Scientology Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz Lsjbot VisualEditor Art+Feminism #1Lib1Ref Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Wikipediocracy Wiki-Watch Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related Wikimedia movement Wikimedia Foundation projects The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Category v t e Wikis Types Personal Medical Semantic Wiki farm Components Software Markup Interwiki links Lists Wikis Software Markups and parsers Comparisons Software Wiki farms See also History of wikis Creole v t e Wikimedia Foundation People Current Aaron Halfaker Dariusz Jemielniak Guy Kawasaki Katherine Maher Jimmy Wales Past Hampton Catlin Danese Cooper Bishakha Datta Florence Devouard Oscar van Dillen Sue Gardner Arnnon Geshuri Mike Godwin James Heilman Erik Möller Lila Tretikov Luis Villa Content projects Wikipedia MediaWiki Wiktionary Wikiquote Wikibooks Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikinews Wikiversity Wikidata Wikivoyage Other List of Wikipedias List of Wikimedia chapters Wikimania The Signpost Litigation Wikimedia v. NSA Wikimedia movement Knowledge Engine v t e List of Wikipedias by article count 5,000,000+ English 2,000,000+ Cebuano Swedish German 1,000,000+ Dutch French Russian Italian Spanish Waray Polish Vietnamese Japanese 500,000+ Portuguese Chinese Ukrainian Catalan Persian Arabic 200,000+ Norwegian (bokmål/riksmål) Serbo-Croatian Finnish Hungarian Indonesian Korean Czech Romanian Serbian Turkish Malay Basque Esperanto Bulgarian Danish Minangkabau Armenian Kazakh Slovak Min Nan Hebrew 100,000+ Lithuanian Croatian Chechen Estonian Slovene Belarusian Galician Norwegian (nynorsk) Greek Uzbek Latin Simple English Urdu Volapük Hindi Azerbaijani Thai Georgian 50,000+ Tamil Welsh Macedonian Malagasy Occitan Latvian Bosnian Newar Tatar Tajik Tagalog Telugu Albanian Kirghiz Piedmontese Breton Belarusian (Taraškievica) Cantonese Haitian 20,000+ Javanese Kannada Icelandic Asturian Marathi Malayalam Bengali Afrikaans Irish Scots Chuvash West Frisian Burmese Swahili Aragonese Yoruba Ido Nepal Bhasa Sicilian Bishnupriya Manipuri Punjabi Alemannic 10,000+ Sundanese Mongolian Egyptian Arabic Samogitian Yiddish Odia Ossetian Sanskrit 1,000+ Uyghur Northern Sami Pashto Dutch Low Saxon Sindhi Jamaican Creole Crimean Tatar Silesian Assamese Ripuarian Konkani Tulu Wolof Classical Chinese 100+ Zulu Xhosa Bambara Venda Cree Authority control WorldCat Identities VIAF: 195846295 LCCN: no2008072801 ISNI: 0000 0004 4914 788X GND: 7545251-0 SUDOC: 11109383X BNF: cb150837752 (data) NKC: kn20090528031 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia&oldid=776980171" Categories: Wikipedia 2001 establishments in the United States American websites Collaborative projects Creative Commons-licensed websites Free internet encyclopedias Internet properties established in 2001 Multilingual websites Open content projects Social information processing Virtual communities Wikimedia projects Wikis Hidden categories: CS1 maint: Unfit url Webarchive template wayback links Pages containing links to subscription-only content CS1 German-language sources (de) Pages using citations with format and no URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2016 Articles with permanently dead external links Pages using web citations with no URL Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles with dead external links from July 2015 Articles with dead external links from March 2017 CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template webcite links Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use American English from November 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from April 2017 Pages using deprecated image syntax Articles containing potentially dated statements from April 2017 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles including recorded pronunciations Articles containing potentially dated statements from February 2014 Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2015 Articles containing potentially dated statements from January 2017 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from March 2017 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Wikipedia articles in need of updating from November 2016 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2008 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from October 2015 Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2010 Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2009 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007 Articles with DMOZ links Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Articles containing video clips Pages with graphs Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikibooks Wikinews Wikiquote Wikiversity Languages Acèh ???????? Afrikaans Akan Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ?????? ??????? Aragonés ????? Armãneashti Arpetan ??????? Asturianu Avañe'? ???? Aymar aru Az?rbaycanca ?????? Bamanankan ????? Bahasa Banjar Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ??????? Bikol Central Bislama ????????? Boarisch ??????? Bosanski Brezhoneg ?????? Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? Dolnoserbski Eesti ???????? Emiliàn e rumagnòl ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ?? G?k?y? ????? ??????? ?????? ?????? ?????? / Gõychi Konknni ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa Hawai?i ??????? ?????? Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue ??????/inuktitut Iñupiak ???? IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kalaallisut ????? Kapampangan ????????-??????? ??????? ????? / ????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî ???????? ????? ???? Ladino ????? ????? ??? ???? ?????? Latga?u Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Ligure Limburgs Lingála Livvinkarjala La .lojban. Luganda Lumbaart Magyar ?????? ?????????? Malagasy ?????? Malti M?ori ????? ????????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-d??ng-ng?? Mirandés ??????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????? N?huatl Dorerin Naoero Nederlands Nedersaksies ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norfuk / Pitkern Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? Pälzisch Pangasinan ?????? Papiamentu ???? Patois ????? ???? ????????? Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski ???????? Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Q?r?mtatarca Reo tahiti Ripoarisch Român? Romani Rumantsch Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sámegiella Gagana Samoa ????????? Sängö Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana Shqip Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? SiSwati Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????????? / ?????????? ?l?nski Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Sranantongo ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Taqbaylit Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ?????? Tetun ??? ???? ?????? ??? Tsetsêhestâhese Tshivenda Türkçe Türkmençe Twi ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? ???? ???????? / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Võro Walon ?? West-Vlams Winaray Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zazaki Zeêuws Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 24 April 2017, at 14:46. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_content |||Free content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For the use of free content on Wikipedia, see Wikipedia:Free content. Free Cultural Works logo Free content, libre content, or free information, is any kind of functional work, work of art, or other creative content that meets the definition of a free cultural work. Contents 1 Definition 2 Legal matters 2.1 Copyright 2.2 Public domain 2.3 Copyleft 3 Usage 3.1 Media 3.2 Software 3.3 Engineering and technology 3.4 Academia 3.5 Legislation 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Definition[edit] A free cultural work (free content) is, according to the Definition of free cultural works, one that has no significant legal restriction on people's freedom to: use the content and benefit from using it, study the content and apply what is learned, make and distribute copies of the content, change and improve the content and distribute these derivative works.[1][2] Free content encompasses all works in the public domain and also those copyrighted works whose licenses honor and uphold the freedoms mentioned above. Because the Berne Convention in most countries by default grants copyright holders monopolistic control over their creations, copyright content must be explicitly declared free, usually by the referencing or inclusion of licensing statements from within the work. Although there are a great many different definitions in regular everyday use, free content is legally very similar, if not like an identical twin, to open content. An analogy is the use of the rival terms free software and open source, which describe ideological differences rather than legal ones.[3][4][5] For instance, the Open Knowledge Foundation's Open Definition describes "open" as synonymous to the definition of free in the "Definition of Free Cultural Works" (as also in the Open Source Definition and Free Software Definition).[6] For such free/open content both movements recommend the same three Creative Commons licenses, the CC BY, CC BY-SA, and CC0.[7][8][9][10] Legal matters[edit] Copyright[edit] copyright Main article: Copyright Copyright is a legal concept, which gives the author or creator of a work legal control over the duplication and public performance of his or her work. In many jurisdictions, this is limited by a time period after which the works then enter the public domain. Copyright laws are a balance between the rights of creators of intellectual and artistic works and the rights of others to build upon those works. During the time period of copyright the author's work may only be copied, modified, or publicly performed with the consent of the author, unless the use is a fair use. Traditional copyright control limits the use of the work of the author to those who either pay royalties to the author for usage of the authors content, or limit their use to fair use. Secondly it limits the use of content whose author cannot be found.[11] Finally it creates a perceived barrier between authors by limiting derivative works, such as mashups and collaborative content[12] Public domain[edit] public domain Main article: Public domain The public domain is a range of creative works whose copyright has expired, or was never established; as well as ideas and facts[nb 1] which are ineligible for copyright. A public domain work is a work whose author has either relinquished to the public, or no longer can claim control over, the distribution and usage of the work. As such any person may manipulate, distribute, or otherwise utilize the work, without legal ramifications. A work in the public domain or released under a permissive licence may be referred to as "copycenter".[13] Copyleft[edit] Main article: Copyleft copyleft Copyleft is a play on the word copyright and describes the practice of using copyright law to remove restrictions on distributing copies and modified versions of a work.[14] The aim of copyleft is to use the legal framework of copyright to enable non-author parties to be able to reuse and, in many licensing schemes, modify content that is created by an author. Unlike works in the public domain, the author still maintains copyright over the material, however the author has granted a non-exclusive license to any person to distribute, and often modify, the work. Copyleft licenses require that any derivative works be distributed under the same terms, and that the original copyright notices be maintained. A symbol commonly associated with copyleft is a reversal of the copyright symbol, facing the other way; the opening of the C points left rather than right. Unlike the copyright symbol, the copyleft symbol does not have a codified meaning.[15] Usage[edit] Projects that provide free content exist in several areas of interest, such as software, academic literature, general literature, music, images, video, and engineering. Technology has reduced the cost of publication and reduced the entry barrier sufficiently to allow for the production of widely disseminated materials by individuals or small groups. Projects to provide free literature and multimedia content have become increasingly prominent owing to the ease of dissemination of materials that is associated with the development of computer technology. Such dissemination may have been too costly prior to these technological developments. Media[edit] Creative Commons Main article: Creative Commons In media, which includes textual, audio, and visual content, free licensing schemes such as some of the licenses made by Creative Commons have allowed for the dissemination of works under a clear set of legal permissions. Not all of the Creative Commons’ licenses are entirely free: their permissions may range from very liberal general redistribution and modification of the work to a more restrictive redistribution-only licensing. Since February 2008, Creative Commons licenses which are entirely free carry a badge indicating that they are "approved for free cultural works".[16] Repositories exist which exclusively feature free material provide content such as photographs, clip art, music,[17] and literature,.[18] While extensive reuse of free content from one website in another website is legal, it is usually not sensible because of the duplicate content problem. Wikipedia is amongst the most well known databases of user uploaded free content on the web. While the vast majority of content on Wikipedia is free content, some copyrighted material is hosted under Fair-use criteria. Software[edit] OSI logo FSF logo Main article: Free and open-source software Free and open source software, which is also often referred to as open source software and free software, is a maturing technology with major companies utilising free software to provide both services and technology to both end users and technical consumers. The ease of dissemination has allowed for increased modularity, which allows for smaller groups to contribute to projects as well as simplifying collaboration. Open source development models have been classified as having a similar peer-recognition and collaborative benefit incentives that are typified by more classical fields such as scientific research, with the social structures that result from this incentive model decreasing production cost.[19] Given sufficient interest in a software component, by using peer-to-peer distribution methods, distribution costs of software may be reduced, removing the burden of infrastructure maintenance from developers. As distribution resources are simultaneously provided by consumers, these software distribution models are scalable, that is the method is feasible regardless of the number of consumers. In some cases, free software vendors may use peer-to-peer technology as a method of dissemination.[20] In general, project hosting and code distribution is not a problem for the most of free projects as a number of providers offer them these services for free. Engineering and technology[edit] Open source hardware logo Free content principles have been translated into fields such as engineering, where designs and engineering knowledge can be readily shared and duplicated, in order to reduce overheads associated with project development. Open design principles can be applied in engineering and technological applications, with projects in mobile telephony, small-scale manufacture,[21] the automotive industry,[22][23] and even agricultural areas.[24] Technologies such as distributed manufacturing can allow computer-aided manufacturing and computer-aided design techniques to be able to develop small-scale production of components for the development of new, or repair of existing, devices. Rapid fabrication technologies underpin these developments, which allow end users of technology to be able to construct devices from pre-existing blueprints, using software and manufacturing hardware to convert information into physical objects. Academia[edit] open access Main article: Open access (publishing) In academic work, the majority of works are not free, although the percentage of works that are open access is growing rapidly. Open access refers to online research outputs that are free of all restrictions on access (e.g. access tolls) and free of many restrictions on use (e.g. certain copyright and license restrictions).[25] Authors may see open access publishing as a method of expanding the audience that is able to access their work to allow for greater impact of the publication, or may support it for ideological reasons.[26][27][28] Open access publishers such as PLOS and Biomed Central provide capacity for review and publishing of free works; though such publications are currently more common in science than humanities. Various funding institutions and governing research bodies have mandated that academics must produce their works to be open-access, in order to qualify for funding, such as the National Institutes of Health, RCUK (effective 2016) and the EU (effective 2020).[29][30][31][32] At an institutional level some universities, such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), have adopted open access publishing by default by introducing their own mandates.[33] Some mandates may permit delayed publication and may charge researchers for open access publishing.[34][35] Open content publication has been seen as a method of reducing costs associated with information retrieval in research, as universities typically pay to subscribe for access to content that is published through traditional means[10][36][37] whilst improving journal quality by discouraging the submission of research articles of reduced quality.[10] Subscriptions for non-free content journals may be expensive for universities to purchase, though the article are written and peer-reviewed by academics themselves at no cost to the publisher. This has led to disputes between publishers and some universities over subscription costs, such as the one which occurred between the University of California and the Nature Publishing Group.[38][39] For teaching purposes, some universities, including MIT, provide freely available course content, such as lecture notes, video resources and tutorials. This content is distributed via Internet resources to the general public. Publication of such resources may be either by a formal institution-wide program,[40] or alternately via informal content provided by individual academics or departments. Legislation[edit] Any country has its own law and legal system, sustained by its legislation, a set of law-documents — documents containing statutory obligation rules, usually law and created by legislatures. In a democratic country, each law-document is published as open media content, is in principle a free content; but in general there are no explicit license attributed for each law-document, so the license must be interpreted, is a implied license. Only few countries have explicit licenses in its law-documents, as the UK's Open Government Licence (a CC-BY compatible license). In the other countries, the implied license comes from its proper rules (general laws and rules about copyright in government works). The automatic protection provided by Berne Convention not apply to law-documents: Article 2.4 excludes the official texts from the automatic protection. It is also possible to "inherit" the license from context. The set of country's law-documents is made available through national repositories. Examples of law-document open repositories: LexML Brazil, Legislation.gov.uk, N-Lex of EU countries. In general a law-document is offered in more than one (open) official version, but the main one is that published by a government gazette. So, law-documents can eventually inherit license expressed by the repository or by the gazette that contains it. See also[edit] Content (media) Definition of Free Cultural Works Free and open source software Free culture movement Free software movement Freedom of information Libre knowledge Open Content Alliance Open publishing Open-source hardware Permissive free software licence Project Gutenberg Notes[edit] ^ The copyright status of uncreative aggregates of basic data may differ by region, for the USA see Feist Publications v. Rural Telephone Service, for Australia, see Telstra v Desktop Marketing Systems References[edit] ^ Erik Möller, e.a. (2008). "Definition of Free Cultural Works". 1.1. freedomdefined.org. Retrieved 2015-04-20.  ^ Stallman, Richard (November 13, 2008). "Free Software and Free Manuals". Free Software Foundation. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Stallman, Richard. "Why Open Source misses the point of Free Software". Free Software Foundation.  ^ Kelty, Christpher M. (2008). "The Cultural Significance of free Software - Two Bits" (PDF). Duke University press - durham and london. p. 99. Prior to 1998, Free Software referred either to the Free Software Foundation (and the watchful, micromanaging eye of Stallman) or to one of thousands of different commercial, avocational, or university-research projects, processes, licenses, and ideologies that had a variety of names: sourceware, freeware, shareware, open software, public domain software, and so on. The term Open Source, by contrast, sought to encompass them all in one movement.  ^ "Goodbye, "free software"; hello, "open source"". Catb.org. Retrieved 2012-10-25.  ^ Open Definition 2.1 on opendefinition.org "This essential meaning matches that of "open" with respect to software as in the Open Source Definition and is synonymous with "free" or "libre" as in the Free Software Definition and Definition of Free Cultural Works." ^ licenses on opendefinition.com ^ Creative Commons 4.0 BY and BY-SA licenses approved conformant with the Open Definition by Timothy Vollmer on creativecommons.org (December 27th, 2013) ^ Open Definition 2.0 released by Timothy Vollmer on creativecommons.org (October 7th, 2014) ^ a b c "Costs and business models in scientific research publishing: A report commissioned by the Wellcome Trust" (PDF). Retrieved May 23, 2009.  ^ "The Importance of Orphan Works Legislation".  ^ Ben Depoorter; Francesco Parisi (2002). "Fair use and copyright protection: a price theory explanation". International Review of Law and Economics. 21 (4): 453. doi:10.1016/S0144-8188#01)00071-0.  ^ Raymond, Eric S. "Copycenter". The Jargon File. Retrieved August 9, 2008.  ^ Dusollier, S (2003). "Open source and copyleft. Authorship reconsidered?". Columbia journal of Law and the Arts. 26 (296).  ^ Hall, G. Brent (2008). Open Source Approaches in Spatial Data Handling. Springer. p. 29. ISBN 3-540-74830-X. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Linksvayer, Mike (February 20, 2008). "Approved for Free Cultural Works". Creative Commons. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "iRate Radio". SourceForge.net. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "Gutenberg:No Cost or Freedom?". Project Gutenberg. April 23, 2007. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Mustonen, Mikko. "Copyleft – the economics of Linux and other open source software" (PDF). Discussion Paper No. 493. Department of Economics, University of Helsinki. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Pawlak, Michel; Bryce, Ciarán; Laurière, Stéphane (May 29, 2008). "The Practice of Free and Open Source Software Processes" (PDF). Rapport de recherche. inria-00274193, version 2. Institut national de recherche en informatique et en automatique (INRIA). N° 6519 (April 2008). ISSN 0249-6399. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Hendry, Andrew (March 4, 2008). "RepRap: An open-source 3D printer for the masses". Computerworld Australia. The Industry Standard. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Honsig, Markus (January 25, 2006). "The most open of all cars". Technology Review (in German). Heinz Heise. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "Australian drive for green commuter cars". The Sydney Morning Herald. Sydney. 14 June 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2015.  ^ Stewart, Jr., C. Neal (December 2005). "Open-source Agriculture" (PDF). ISB News Report. Information Systems for Biotechnology (ISB). Retrieved March 22, 2009.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Suber, Peter. "Open Access Overview". Earlham.edu. Retrieved on 2011-12-03. ^ Alma Swan; Sheridan Brown (May 2005). "Open access self-archiving: An author study" (PDF). Key Perspectives Limited.  ^ Andrew, Theo (October 30, 2003). "Trends in Self-Posting of Research Material Online by Academic Staff". Ariadne. UKOLN (37). ISSN 1361-3200. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Key Perspectives. "JISC/OSI Journal Authors Survey Report" (PDF). Joint Information Systems Committee (JISC). Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Haslam, Maryanne. "NHMRC Partnership Projects – Funding Policy" (PDF). National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 17, 2009. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "Policy on Enhancing Public Access to Archived Publications Resulting from NIH-Funded Research". Retrieved July 12, 2009.  ^ "Open access - RCUK Policy and revised guidance".  ^ "Outcome of Proceedings, 9526/16 RECH 208 TELECOM 100, The transition towards an Open Science System".  ^ "MIT faculty open access to their scholarly articles". MIT news. 20 March 2009.  ^ "Policy of the Society for General Microbiology towards author self-archiving on PubMed Central and institutional and other repositories". Retrieved April 10, 2009.  ^ "OnlineOpen". Retrieved April 10, 2009.  ^ Mayor, Susan (April 19, 2003). "Libraries face higher costs for academic journals". BMJ: British Medical Journal. BMJ Group. 326 (7394): 840. PMC 1125769.  |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ "AMS Journal price survey". Retrieved May 23, 2009.  ^ "Response from the University of California to the Public statement from Nature Publishing Group regarding subscription renewals at the California Digital Library" (PDF). June 10, 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 26, 2010. Retrieved September 13, 2015.  ^ Hawkes, Nigel (November 10, 2003). "Boycott 'greedy' journal publishers, say scientists". The Times. London. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Retrieved September 13, 2015.  ^ "About OpenCourseWare". Retrieved April 10, 2009.  Further reading[edit] D. Atkins; J. S. Brown; A. L. Hammond (February 2007). A Review of the Open Educational Resources (OER) Movement: Achievements, Challenges, and New Opportunities. (PDF). Report to The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation.  OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development: Giving Knowledge for free – The Emergence of Open Educational Resources. 2007, ISBN 92-64-03174-X. External links[edit] Definition of Free Cultural Works – A definition of "free content" or "free cultural works" similar to the free software definition "Episodes of collective invention" (PDF) (Peter B. Meyer; August 4, 2003) – article on several U.S.-oriented historical examples of free content in technology Open Definition – project by the Open Knowledge Foundation which provides a definition of "open" suitable for content and data What is free content? on WikiEducator v t e Intellectual property activism Issues Copyright infringement Digital rights management Gripe site Intellectual property Legal aspects of file sharing Mashup digital videos music Music piracy Orphan works Patents biological software software patent debate trolling Public domain Concepts All rights reversed Alternative compensation system Anti-copyright notice Business models for open source software Copyleft Commercial use of copyleft works Commons-based peer production Free content Free software license Infoanarchism Libertarian positions Open content Open design Open Music Model Open patent Open-source hardware Open source software Prize system contests Share-alike Video on demand Movements Access to Knowledge movement Anti-copyright Cultural environmentalism Free culture movement Free software movement Organizations Copyright Alliance Creative Commons Electronic Frontier Foundation Free Software Foundation Open Rights Group Organization for Transformative Works The Pirate Bay Piratbyrån Pirate Party Sci-Hub Students for Free Culture People Alexandra Elbakyan Rickard Falkvinge Lawrence Lessig Richard Stallman Peter Sunde Peter Suber Aaron Swartz Documentaries Steal This Film (2006, 2007) Good Copy Bad Copy (2007) RiP!: A Remix Manifesto (2008) TPB AFK: The Pirate Bay Away From Keyboard (2013) The Internet's Own Boy (2014) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Free_content&oldid=775063470" Categories: Free content Digital art Free software Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Pages using ISBN magic links Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages ??????? ???? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Català ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Gaeilge Galego ??? ??????? Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??? Latviešu Magyar ?????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ??? Napulitano ??????? Polski Português ??????? Scots Shqip Simple English Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ??? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 12 April 2017, at 12:27. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Encyclopedia |||Encyclopedia From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article is about the type of reference work. For other uses, see Encyclopedia (disambiguation). This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in German. (December 2015) Click [show] for important translation instructions.  View a machine-translated version of the German article. Google's machine translation is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. After translating, {{Translated|de|Enzyklopädie}} must be added to the talk page to ensure copyright compliance. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. Brockhaus Enzyklopädie An encyclopedia or encyclopaedia (also spelled encyclopædia, see spelling differences)[1] is a type of reference work or compendium holding a comprehensive summary of information from either all branches of knowledge or a particular branch of knowledge.[2] Encyclopedias are divided into articles or entries, which are usually accessed alphabetically by article name.[3] Encyclopedia entries are longer and more detailed than those in most dictionaries.[3] Generally speaking, unlike dictionary entries which focus on linguistic information about words, encyclopedia articles focus on factual information concerning the subject for which the article is named.[4][5][6][7] Encyclopedias have existed for around 2,000 years; the oldest still in existence, Naturalis Historia, was written starting in ca. AD 77 by Pliny the Elder and was not fully revised at the time of his death in AD 79. The modern encyclopedia evolved out of dictionaries around the 17th century. Historically, some encyclopedias were contained in one volume, whereas others, such as the Encyclopædia Britannica, the Enciclopedia Italiana (62 volumes, 56,000 pages) or the world's largest, Enciclopedia universal ilustrada europeo-americana (118 volumes, 105,000 pages), became huge multi-volume works. Some modern encyclopedias, such as Wikipedia, are often electronic and freely available. Contents 1 Etymology 2 Characteristics 3 History 3.1 Ancient times 3.2 Middle Ages 3.3 Renaissance 3.4 18th–19th centuries 3.5 20th century 3.6 21st century 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Etymology See also: American and British English spelling differences § Simplification of ae and oe Title page of "Lucubrationes..." 1541 edition, the first book to use the word encyclopedia in the title The word encyclopedia comes from the Koine Greek ????????? ???????,[8] transliterated enkyklios paideia, meaning "general education" from enkyklios (?????????), meaning "circular, recurrent, required regularly, general"[9] and paideia (???????), meaning "education, rearing of a child";[10] it was reduced to a single word due to an error[11] by copyists of Latin manuscripts. Together, the phrase literally translates as "complete instruction" or "complete knowledge". Indeed, the purpose of an encyclopedia is to collect knowledge disseminated around the globe; to set forth its general system to the men with whom we live, and transmit it to those who will come after us, so that the work of preceding centuries will not become useless to the centuries to come; and so that our offspring, becoming better instructed, will at the same time become more virtuous and happy, and that we should not die without having rendered a service to the human race in the future years to come. —?Diderot[12] Copyists of Latin manuscripts took this phrase to be a single Greek word, enkyklopaidia, with the same meaning, and this spurious Greek word became the New Latin word "encyclopaedia", which in turn came into English. Though the notion of a compendium of knowledge dates back thousands of years, the term was first used in the title of a book in 1517 by Johannes Aventinus: Encyclopedia orbisque doctrinarum, hoc est omnium artium, scientiarum, ipsius philosophiae index ac divisio, and in 1538 by Joachimus Fortius Ringelbergius, Lucubrationes vel potius absolutissima kyklopaideia (Basel, 1538). Title page of Skalich's Encyclopaedia, seu orbis disciplinarum, tam sacrarum quam prophanarum, epistemon from 1559, first to use the word encyclopaedia as a noun in the title The word encyclopaedia was first used as a noun in the title of his book by the Croatian encyclopedist Pavao Skali? in his Encyclopaedia seu orbis disciplinarum tam sacrarum quam prophanarum epistemon (Encyclopaedia, or Knowledge of the World of Disciplines, Basel, 1559). One of the oldest vernacular uses was by François Rabelais in his Pantagruel in 1532.[13][14] Several encyclopedias have names that include the suffix -p(a)edia, e.g., Banglapedia (on matters relevant for Bengal). In British usage, the spellings encyclopedia and encyclopaedia are both current.[15] In American usage, only the former is commonly used.[16] The spelling encyclopædia—with the æ ligature—was frequently used in the 19th century and is increasingly rare, although it is retained in product titles such as Encyclopædia Britannica and others. The Oxford English Dictionary (1989) records encyclopædia and encyclopaedia as equal alternatives (in that order), and notes the æ would be obsolete except that it is preserved in works that have Latin titles. Webster's Third New International Dictionary (1997–2002) features encyclopedia as the main headword and encyclopaedia as a minor variant. In addition, cyclopedia and cyclopaedia are now rarely used shortened forms of the word originating in the 17th century. Characteristics The modern encyclopedia was developed from the dictionary in the 18th century. Historically, both encyclopedias and dictionaries have been researched and written by well-educated, well-informed content experts, but they are significantly different in structure. A dictionary is a linguistic work which primarily focuses on alphabetical listing of words and their definitions. Synonymous words and those related by the subject matter are to be found scattered around the dictionary, giving no obvious place for in-depth treatment. Thus, a dictionary typically provides limited information, analysis or background for the word defined. While it may offer a definition, it may leave the reader lacking in understanding the meaning, significance or limitations of a term, and how the term relates to a broader field of knowledge. An encyclopedia is, allegedly, not written in order to convince, although one of its goals is indeed to convince its reader about its own veracity. In the terms of Aristotle's Modes of persuasion, a dictionary should persuade the reader through logos (conveying only appropriate emotions); it will be expected to have a lack of pathos (it should not stir up irrelevant emotions), and to have little ethos except that of the dictionary itself. To address those needs, an encyclopedia article is typically not limited to simple definitions, and is not limited to defining an individual word, but provides a more extensive meaning for a subject or discipline. In addition to defining and listing synonymous terms for the topic, the article is able to treat the topic's more extensive meaning in more depth and convey the most relevant accumulated knowledge on that subject. An encyclopedia article also often includes many maps and illustrations, as well as bibliography and statistics. Four major elements define an encyclopedia: its subject matter, its scope, its method of organization, and its method of production: Encyclopedias can be general, containing articles on topics in every field (the English-language Encyclopædia Britannica and German Brockhaus are well-known examples). General encyclopedias often contain guides on how to do a variety of things, as well as embedded dictionaries and gazetteers.[citation needed] There are also encyclopedias that cover a wide variety of topics but from a particular cultural, ethnic, or national perspective, such as the Great Soviet Encyclopedia or Encyclopaedia Judaica. Works of encyclopedic scope aim to convey the important accumulated knowledge for their subject domain, such as an encyclopedia of medicine, philosophy, or law. Works vary in the breadth of material and the depth of discussion, depending on the target audience. (For example, the Medical encyclopedia produced by A.D.A.M., Inc. for the U.S. National Institutes of Health.) Some systematic method of organization is essential to making an encyclopedia usable as a work of reference. There have historically been two main methods of organizing printed encyclopedias: the alphabetical method (consisting of a number of separate articles, organized in alphabetical order), or organization by hierarchical categories. The former method is today the most common by far, especially for general works. The fluidity of electronic media, however, allows new possibilities for multiple methods of organization of the same content. Further, electronic media offer previously unimaginable capabilities for search, indexing and cross reference. The epigraph from Horace on the title page of the 18th century Encyclopédie suggests the importance of the structure of an encyclopedia: "What grace may be added to commonplace matters by the power of order and connection." As modern multimedia and the information age have evolved, they have had an ever-increasing effect on the collection, verification, summation, and presentation of information of all kinds. Projects such as Everything2, Encarta, h2g2, and Wikipedia are examples of new forms of the encyclopedia as information retrieval becomes simpler. The method of production for an encyclopedia historically has been supported in both for-profit and non-profit contexts. The Great Soviet Encyclopedia mentioned above was entirely state sponsored, while the Britannica was supported as a for-profit institution. By comparison, Wikipedia is supported by volunteers contributing in a non-profit environment under the organization of the Wikimedia Foundation. Some works entitled "dictionaries" are actually similar to encyclopedias, especially those concerned with a particular field (such as the Dictionary of the Middle Ages, the Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships, and Black's Law Dictionary). The Macquarie Dictionary, Australia's national dictionary, became an encyclopedic dictionary after its first edition in recognition of the use of proper nouns in common communication, and the words derived from such proper nouns. There are some broad differences between encyclopedias and dictionaries. Most noticeably, encyclopedia articles are longer, fuller and more thorough than entries in most general-purpose dictionaries.[3][17] There are differences in content as well. Generally speaking, dictionaries provide linguistic information about words themselves, while encyclopedias focus more on the thing for which those words stand.[4][5][6][7] Thus, while dictionary entries are inextricably fixed to the word described, encyclopedia articles can be given a different entry name. As such, dictionary entries are not fully translatable into other languages, but encyclopedia articles can be.[4] In practice, however, the distinction is not concrete, as there is no clear-cut difference between factual, "encyclopedic" information and linguistic information such as appears in dictionaries.[6][17][18] Thus encyclopedias may contain material that is also found in dictionaries, and vice versa.[18] In particular, dictionary entries often contain factual information about the thing named by the word.[17][18] History Main article: History of encyclopedias Encyclopedias have progressed from the beginning of history in written form, through medieval and modern times in print, and most recently, displayed on computer and distributed via computer networks. Ancient times Naturalis Historiæ, 1669 edition, title page One of the earliest encyclopedic works to have survived to modern times is the Naturalis Historia of Pliny the Elder, a Roman statesman living in the 1st century AD. He compiled a work of 37 chapters covering natural history, architecture, medicine, geography, geology, and all aspects of the world around him. He stated in the preface that he had compiled 20,000 facts from 2000 works by over 200 authors, and added many others from his own experience. The work was published around AD 77-79, although he probably never finished proofing the work before his death in the eruption of Vesuvius in AD 79.[19] Middle Ages Isidore of Seville, one of the greatest scholars of the early Middle Ages, is widely recognized for writing the first encyclopedia of the Middle Ages, the Etymologiae (The Etymologies) or Origines (around 630), in which he compiled a sizable portion of the learning available at his time, both ancient and contemporary. The work has 448 chapters in 20 volumes, and is valuable because of the quotes and fragments of texts by other authors that would have been lost had he not collected them. The most popular encyclopedia of the Carolingian Age was the De universo or De rerum naturis by Rabanus Maurus, written about 830; it was based on Etymologiae.[citation needed] The encyclopedia of Suda, a massive 10th-century Byzantine encyclopedia, had 30 000 entries, many drawing from ancient sources that have since been lost, and often derived from medieval Christian compilers. The text was arranged alphabetically with some slight deviations from common vowel order and place in the Greek alphabet. The early Muslim compilations of knowledge in the Middle Ages included many comprehensive works. Around year 960, the Brethren of Purity of Basra[20] were engaged in their Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity. Notable works include Abu Bakr al-Razi's encyclopedia of science, the Mutazilite Al-Kindi's prolific output of 270 books, and Ibn Sina's medical encyclopedia, which was a standard reference work for centuries. Also notable are works of universal history (or sociology) from Asharites, al-Tabri, al-Masudi, Tabari's History of the Prophets and Kings, Ibn Rustah, al-Athir, and Ibn Khaldun, whose Muqadimmah contains cautions regarding trust in written records that remain wholly applicable today. The enormous encyclopedic work in China of the Four Great Books of Song, compiled by the 11th century AD during the early Song dynasty (960–1279), was a massive literary undertaking for the time. The last encyclopedia of the four, the Prime Tortoise of the Record Bureau, amounted to 9.4 million Chinese characters in 1000 written volumes. In the late Middle Ages, several authors had the ambition of compiling the sum of human knowledge in a certain field or overall, for example Bartholomew of England, Vincent of Beauvais, Radulfus Ardens, Sydrac, Brunetto Latini, Giovanni da Sangiminiano, Pierre Bersuire. Some were women, like Hildegard of Bingen and Herrad of Landsberg. The most successful of those publications were the Speculum maius (Great Mirror) of Vincent of Beauvais and the De proprietatibus rerum (On the Properties of Things) by Bartholomew of England. The latter was translated (or adapted) into French, Provençal, Italian, English, Flemish, Anglo-Norman, Spanish, and German during the Middle Ages. Both were written in the middle of the 13th century. No medieval encyclopedia bore the title Encyclopaedia – they were often called On nature (De natura, De naturis rerum), Mirror (Speculum maius, Speculum universale), Treasure (Trésor).[21] Renaissance Anatomy in Margarita Philosophica, 1565 These works were all hand copied and thus rarely available, beyond wealthy patrons or monastic men of learning: they were expensive, and usually written for those extending knowledge rather than those using it.[22] During the Renaissance, the creation of printing allowed a wider diffusion of encyclopedias and every scholar could have his or her own copy. The De expetendis et fugiendis rebus by Giorgio Valla was posthumously printed in 1501 by Aldo Manuzio in Venice. This work followed the traditional scheme of liberal arts. However, Valla added the translation of ancient Greek works on mathematics (firstly by Archimedes), newly discovered and translated. The Margarita Philosophica by Gregor Reisch, printed in 1503, was a complete encyclopedia explaining the seven liberal arts. The term encyclopaedia was coined by 16th century humanists who misread copies of their texts of Pliny and Quintilian, and combined the two Greek words "enkyklios paideia" into one word, ??????????????.[23] The phrase enkyklios paideia (????????? ???????) was used by Plutarch and the Latin word Encyclopedia came from him. The first work titled in this way was the Encyclopedia orbisque doctrinarum, hoc est omnium artium, scientiarum, ipsius philosophiae index ac divisio written by Johannes Aventinus in 1517.[citation needed] The English physician and philosopher, Sir Thomas Browne used the word 'encyclopaedia' in 1646 in the preface to the reader to define his Pseudodoxia Epidemica, a major work of the 17th-century scientific revolution. Browne structured his encyclopaedia upon the time-honoured schemata of the Renaissance, the so-called 'scale of creation' which ascends through the mineral, vegetable, animal, human, planetary, and cosmological worlds. Pseudodoxia Epidemica was a European best-seller, translated into French, Dutch, and German as well as Latin it went through no fewer than five editions, each revised and augmented, the last edition appearing in 1672. Factors that changed the size of encyclopedias were financial, commercial, legal, and intellectual. During the Renaissance, middle classes were having more time to read and encyclopedias helped them to learn more. Publishers were wanting to increase their output so some countries like Germany start selling books that were missing alphabetical sections to publish faster. Also, publishers could not afford all the resources by themselves so they multiple publishers would come together with their resources to create better encyclopedias. Soon it was difficult financially to continue to produce the amount they wanted to produce so then subscriptions and serial publications were made. This was risky for publishers because they had to find people that would pay all upfront or make payments. When this did work out capital would rise and there would be a steady income for encyclopedias. Later rivalry grew causing copyright to occur due to weak underdeveloped laws. Some publishers would copy another publisher’s work to produce an encyclopedia faster and cheaper so consumers did not have to pay a lot and they would sell more. Encyclopedias made it to where middle class citizens could basically have a small library in their own house. Europeans were becoming more curious about their society around them causing them to revolt against their government.[24] 18th–19th centuries Encyclopédie, 1773 The beginnings of the modern idea of the general-purpose, widely distributed printed encyclopedia precede the 18th century encyclopedists. However, Chambers' Cyclopaedia, or Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences (1728), and the Encyclopédie of Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert (1751 onwards), as well as Encyclopædia Britannica and the Conversations-Lexikon, were the first to realize the form we would recognize today, with a comprehensive scope of topics, discussed in depth and organized in an accessible, systematic method. Chambers, in 1728, followed the earlier lead of John Harris's Lexicon Technicum of 1704 and later editions (see also below); this work was by its title and content "A Universal English Dictionary of Arts and Sciences: Explaining not only the Terms of Art, but the Arts Themselves". During the 19th and early 20th century, many smaller or less developed languages[which?] saw their first encyclopedias, using French, German, and English role models. While encyclopedias in larger languages, having large markets that could support a large editorial staff, churned out new 20-volume works in a few years and new editions with brief intervals, such publication plans often spanned a decade or more in smaller languages.[citation needed] 20th century 1913 advertisement for Encyclopædia Britannica, the oldest and one of the largest contemporary English encyclopedias Popular and affordable encyclopedias such as Harmsworth's Universal Encyclopaedia and the Children's Encyclopaedia appeared in the early 1920s. In the United States, the 1950s and 1960s saw the introduction of several large popular encyclopedias, often sold on installment plans. The best known of these were World Book and Funk and Wagnalls. The second half of the 20th century also saw the proliferation of specialized encyclopedias that compiled topics in specific fields. This trend has continued. Encyclopedias of at least one volume in size now exist for most if not all academic disciplines, including such narrow topics such as bioethics. By the late 20th century, encyclopedias were being published on CD-ROMs for use with personal computers. Microsoft's Encarta, launched in 1993, was a landmark example as it had no printed equivalent. Articles were supplemented with both video and audio files as well as numerous high-quality images. After sixteen years, Microsoft discontinued the Encarta line of products in 2009.[25] 21st century In 2001, Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger launched Wikipedia, a collaboratively edited, multilingual, open-source, free Internet encyclopedia supported by the non-profit Wikimedia Foundation. As of 23 April 2017, there are 5,391,001 articles in the English Wikipedia. There are 287 different editions of Wikipedia. As of February 2014, it had 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors each month.[26] Wikipedia has more than 25 million accounts, out of which there were over 118,000 active editors globally, as of August 2015. Wikipedia's accuracy was found by a Nature study to be close to that of Encyclopædia Britannica,[27] with Wikipedia being much larger. However, critics argue Wikipedia exhibits systemic bias,[28][29] and its group dynamics hinder its goals.[clarification needed] Many academics, historians, teachers, and journalists reject Wikipedia as a reliable source of information, primarily for being a mixture of truths, half truths, and some falsehoods, and that as a resource about many controversial topics, is notoriously subject to manipulation and spin.[citation needed] While Wikipedia is by far the largest web-based encyclopedia, it is not the only one in existence. There are several much smaller, usually more specialized, encyclopedias on various themes, sometimes dedicated to a specific geographic region or time period.[30] See also Bibliography of encyclopedias Biographical dictionary Encyclopedic knowledge Encyclopedism Fictitious entry History of science and technology Lexicography Library science Lists of encyclopedias Thesaurus Speculum literature Portals Access related topics Literature portal Library and information science portal Education portal Notes ^ "encyclopaedia" (online). Oxford English Dictionary (OED.com), Oxford University Press. Retrieved February 18, 2012.  ^ "Encyclopedia.". Archived from the original on August 3, 2007.  Glossary of Library Terms. Riverside City College, Digital Library/Learning Resource Center. Retrieved on: November 17, 2007. ^ a b c Hartmann, R. R. K.; James, Gregory; James, Gregory (1998). Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge. p. 48. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010.  ^ a b c Béjoint, Henri (2000). Modern Lexicography, pp. 30–31. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-829951-6 ^ a b "Encyclopaedia". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved July 27, 2010. An English lexicographer, H.W. Fowler, wrote in the preface to the first edition (1911) of The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Current English language that a dictionary is concerned with the uses of words and phrases and with giving information about the things for which they stand only so far as current use of the words depends upon knowledge of those things. The emphasis in an encyclopedia is much more on the nature of the things for which the words and phrases stand.  ^ a b c Hartmann, R. R. K.; Gregory, James (1998). Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge. p. 49. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010. In contrast with linguistic information, encyclopedia material is more concerned with the description of objective realities than the words or phrases that refer to them. In practice, however, there is no hard and fast boundary between factual and lexical knowledge.  ^ a b Cowie, Anthony Paul (2009). The Oxford History of English Lexicography, Volume I. Oxford University Press. p. 22. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved August 17, 2010. An 'encyclopedia' (encyclopaedia) usually gives more information than a dictionary; it explains not only the words but also the things and concepts referred to by the words.  ^ ????????? ???????, Quintilian, Institutio Oratoria, 1.10.1, at Perseus Project ^ ?????????, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon, at Perseus Project ^ ???????, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon, at Perseus Project ^ According to some accounts, such as the American Heritage Dictionary, copyists of Latin manuscripts took this phrase to be a single Greek word, ?????????????? enkyklopaidia. ^ Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert Encyclopédie. University of Michigan Library:Scholarly Publishing Office and DLXS. Retrieved on: November 17, 2007 ^ Roest, Bert (1997). "Compilation as Theme and Praxis in Franciscan Universal Chronicles". In Peter Binkley. Pre-Modern Encyclopaedic Texts: Proceedings of the Second Comers Congress, Groningen, 1 – July 4, 1996. BRILL. p. 213. ISBN 90-04-10830-0.  ^ Carey, Sorcha (2003). "Two Strategies of Encyclopaedism". Pliny's Catalogue of Culture: Art and Empire in the Natural History. Oxford University Press. p. 17. ISBN 0-19-925913-5.  ^ "encyclopaedia", Chambers Reference Online; "encyclopaedia"[dead link], AskOxford. ^ "encyclopaedia" Archived February 17, 2009, at the Wayback Machine., Bartleby.com; "Encyclopaedia", Merriam Webster."Archived copy". Archived from the original on February 17, 2009. Retrieved 2006-12-12.  CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) ^ a b c Hartmann, R. R. K.; James, Gregory; James, Gregory (1998). "Encyclopedic definition". Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge: 48–49. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010. Usually these two aspects overlap – encyclopedic information being difficult to distinguish from linguistic information – and dictionaries attempt to capture both in the explanation of a meaning...  ^ a b c Béjoint, Henri (2000). Modern Lexicography. Oxford University Press. p. 31. ISBN 0-19-829951-6. The two types, as we have seen, are not easily differentiated; encyclopedias contain information that is also to be found in dictionaries, and vice versa.  ^ Naturalis Historia ^ P.D. Wightman (1953), The Growth of Scientific Ideas ^ Monique Paulmier-Foucart, "Medieval Encyclopaedias", in André Vauchez (ed.), Encyclopedia of the Middle Ages, James Clarke & Co, 2002. ^ See "Encyclopedia" in Dictionary of the Middle Ages. ^ ??????????????, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon, at Perseus Project: "f. l. [= falsa lectio, Latin for "false reading"] for ????????? ???????" ^ Loveland, J. (2012). "Why Encyclopedias Got Bigger … and Smaller". Information & Culture. 47 (2): 233–254. doi:10.1353/lac.2012.0012.  ^ Important Notice: MSN Encarta to be Discontinued. MSN Encarta. Archived from the original on October 31, 2009.  ^ Cohen, Noam (February 9, 2014). "Wikipedia vs. the Small Screen". New York Times.  ^ Giles, Jim (December 2005). "Internet encyclopedias go head to head". Nature. 438 (7070): 900–901. Bibcode:2005Natur.438..900G. doi:10.1038/438900a. PMID 16355180. (subscription required) Note: The study was cited in several news articles; e.g.: "Wikipedia survives research test". BBC News. December 15, 2005.  ^ "Gender Bias in Wikipedia and Britannica". Retrieved June 2, 2015.  ^ "Analyzing and visualizing the semantic coverage of Wikipedia and its authors". Complexity. 12: 30–40. doi:10.1002/cplx.20164. Retrieved June 2, 2015.  ^ Sideris A., "The Encyclopedic Concept in the Web Era", in Ioannides M., Arnold D., Niccolucci F. and K. Mania (eds.), The e-volution of Information Communication Technology in Cultural Heritage. Where Hi-Tech Touches the Past: Risks and Challenges for the 21st Century. VAST 2006, Epoch, Budapest 2006, pp. 192-197. ISBN 963-8046-74-0. References EtymologyOnline "Encyclopaedia". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved July 27, 2010.  Béjoint, Henri (2000). Modern Lexicography. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-829951-6.  C. Codoner, S. Louis, M. Paulmier-Foucart, D. Hüe, M. Salvat, A. Llinares, L'Encyclopédisme. Actes du Colloque de Caen, A. Becq (dir.), Paris, 1991. Bergenholtz, H.; Nielsen, S.; Tarp, S., eds. (2009). Lexicography at a Crossroads: Dictionaries and Encyclopedias Today, Lexicographical Tools Tomorrow. Peter Lang. ISBN 978-3-03911-799-4.  Blom, Phillip (2004). Enlightening the World: Encyclopédie, the Book that Changed the Course of History. New York; Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-4039-6895-1. OCLC 57669780.  Collison, Robert Lewis (1966). Encyclopaedias: Their History Throughout the Ages (2nd ed.). New York, London: Hafner. OCLC 220101699.  Cowie, Anthony Paul (2009). The Oxford History of English Lexicography, Volume I. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved August 17, 2010.  Darnton, Robert (1979). The business of enlightenment : a publishing history of the Encyclopédie, 1775–1800. Cambridge: Belknap Press. ISBN 0-674-08785-2.  Hartmann, R. R. K.; James, Gregory; James, Gregory (1998). Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010.  Kafker, Frank A., ed. (1981). Notable encyclopedias of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries: nine predecessors of the Encyclopédie. Oxford: Voltaire Foundation. ISBN 978-0-7294-0256-9. OCLC 10645788.  Kafker, Frank A., ed. (1994). Notable encyclopedias of the late eighteenth century: eleven successors of the Encyclopédie. Oxford: Voltaire Foundation. ISBN 978-0-7294-0467-9. OCLC 30787125.  Needham, Joseph (1986). "Part 7, Military Technology; the Gunpowder Epic". Science and Civilization in China. 5 – Chemistry and Chemical Technology. Taipei: Caves Books Ltd. ISBN 978-0-521-30358-3. OCLC 59245877.  Rosenzweig, Roy (June 2006). "Can History Be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the Past". Journal of American History. 93 (1): 117–46. doi:10.2307/4486062. ISSN 1945-2314. Archived from the original on April 25, 2010.  Sideris, Athanasios (2006). "The Encyclopedic Concept in the Web Era", in Ioannides M., Arnold D., Niccolucci F. and K. Mania (eds.), The e-volution of Information Communication Technology in Cultural Heritage. Where Hi-Tech Touches the Past: Risks and Challenges for the 21st Century. VAST 2006, Epoch, Budapest, pp. 192–197. ISBN 963-8046-74-0. Walsh, S. Padraig (1968). Anglo-American general encyclopedias: a historical bibliography, 1703–1967. New York: Bowker. p. 270. OCLC 577541.  Yeo, Richard R. (2001). Encyclopaedic visions : scientific dictionaries and enlightenment culture. Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-65191-2. OCLC 45828872.  External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Encyclopedias. Look up encyclopedia, encyclopaedia, or encyclopedic in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikisource has original works on the topic: Encyclopedias Encyclopaedia and Hypertext Internet Accuracy Project – Biographical errors in encyclopedias and almanacs Encyclopedia – Diderot's article on the Encyclopedia from the original Encyclopédie. De expetendis et fugiendis rebus – First Renaissance encyclopedia Errors and inconsistencies in several printed reference books and encyclopedias Archived July 18, 2001, at the Wayback Machine. Digital encyclopedias put the world at your fingertips – CNET article Encyclopedias online University of Wisconsin – Stout listing by category Chambers' Cyclopaedia, 1728, with the 1753 supplement Encyclopædia Americana, 1851, Francis Lieber ed. (Boston: Mussey & Co.) at the University of Michigan Making of America site Encyclopædia Britannica, articles and illustrations from 9th ed., 1875–89, and 10th ed., 1902–03. Texts on Wikisource: "Cyclopædia". Collier's New Encyclopedia. 1921.  "Encyclopædia". Encyclopedia Americana. 1920.  "Encyclopædia". The New Student's Reference Work. 1914.  "Encyclopaedia". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.  "Encyclopædia". The Nuttall Encyclopædia. 1907.  "Encyclopædia". New International Encyclopedia. 1905.  "Cyclopædia". The American Cyclopædia. 1879.  Authority control GND: 4014986-9 NDL: 00563841 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Encyclopedia&oldid=774134996" Categories: Encyclopedias Works about history Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2016 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown Pages containing links to subscription-only content Pages using ISBN magic links Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use mdy dates from February 2016 Articles to be expanded from December 2015 All articles to be expanded Featured articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Articles containing Ancient Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Collier's Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW with an wstitle parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Nuttall Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans Akan Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti Asturianu ???? Az?rbaycanca Bamanankan ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski Eesti ???????? Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ??? Hawai?i ??????? ?????? Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ????? / ????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Ladino ????? ??? Latga?u Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Limburgs Lumbaart Magyar ?????????? Malagasy ?????? Malti ????? ????????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-d??ng-ng?? Mirandés ?????? ?????????? N?huatl Nederlands Nedersaksies ?????? ??? Napulitano ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan ???? ????? ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ?????? Papiamentu ???? ????????? Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski ???????? Português Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? ????????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????????? / ?????????? ?l?nski ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ?????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? ???????? / Uyghurche Vèneto Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Walon ?? Winaray Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?????? ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 6 April 2017, at 14:10. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Introduction |||Wikipedia:Introduction From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Help:Contents Introduction   Learn more about editing   Explore Wikipedia   Tutorial What is Wikipedia? Play media A short video about the satisfaction editors get from contributing Wikipedia is a free encyclopedia, written collaboratively by the people who use it. It is a special type of website designed to make collaboration easy, called a wiki. Many people are constantly improving Wikipedia, making thousands of changes per hour. All of these changes are recorded in article histories and recent changes. For a more detailed account of the project, see About Wikipedia. How you can contribute Click "Edit" to change an article Play media Editing tutorial for Wikipedia Don't be afraid to edit – anyone can edit almost every page, and we are encouraged to be bold! Find something that can be improved and make it better—for example, spelling, grammar, rewriting for readability, adding content, or removing non-constructive edits. If you wish to add new facts, please try to provide references so they may be verified, or suggest them on the article's discussion page. Changes to controversial topics and Wikipedia's main pages should usually be discussed first. Contributing to Wikipedia will provide you with resources on all the basics needed to use, comment on, and contribute to Wikipedia. Remember – you can't break Wikipedia; all edits can be reversed, fixed or improved later. Wikipedia is allowed to be imperfect. So go ahead, edit an article and help make Wikipedia the best information source on the Internet! Donate – Wikipedia is free to use, but relies on donations and grants to do so. Please consider donating using the Donate to Wikipedia link on the left to help with the project's running costs and expansion. Why not try out the editor right now? Click here to edit the sandbox, a place to make test edits. (If there is already some text there, add to the end of the text.) Type some text. Click Show preview to test your changes, or Save page when you're happy with the way it looks. Next: Learn more about editing ? Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Introduction&oldid=680454568" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia quick introductions Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Afrikaans Alemannisch Ænglisc ??????? ??????? ???? ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski ?????? Català Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ??????? ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano ????? Kapampangan ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî Ladino ??? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Limburgs Magyar ?????????? ?????? ???? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ??? Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ???? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Romani Runa Simi ??????? Sámegiella ????????? Sardu Scots Sicilianu Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ??? Türkçe ?????? ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 10 September 2015, at 23:28. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:Statistics |||Statistics Jump to: navigation, search Page statistics Content pages 5,393,683 Pages (All pages in the wiki, including talk pages, redirects, etc.) 41,989,767 Uploaded files 844,765 Edit statistics Page edits since Wikipedia was set up 886,655,599 Average edits per page 21.12 User statistics Registered users 30,796,028 Active registered users (list of members) (Users who have performed an action in the last 30 days) 135,691 Bots (list of members) 314 Administrators (list of members) 1,263 Bureaucrats (list of members) 22 Pending changes reviewers (list of members) 6,772 Stewards (list of members) 0 Account creators (list of members) 342 Importers (list of members) 2 Transwiki importers (list of members) 0 IP block exemptions (list of members) 164 Oversighters (list of members) 50 Founder (list of members) 1 Rollbackers (list of members) 5,723 Autopatrolled (list of members) 3,647 Researchers (list of members) 10 File movers (list of members) 397 Checkusers (list of members) 39 Template editors (list of members) 154 Mass message senders (list of members) 47 Extended confirmed users (list of members) 33,796 Page movers (list of members) 132 New page reviewers (list of members) 392 Edit filter managers (list of members) 169 Confirmed users (list of members) 481 Course coordinators (list of members) 24 Course online volunteers (list of members) 91 Course campus volunteers (list of members) 104 Course instructors (list of members) 215 Other statistics Queued mass messages 0 Other statistics Internal statistics See here for the job queue statistic ("jobs") Special:ValidationStatistics: Pending changes statistics See also Wikipedia:Statistics and Category:Wikipedia statistics for a fuller list of pages that provide, analyze or discuss Wikipedia statistics. External statistics Most viewed pages Site traffic statistics Article traffic statistics Wikipedia Statistics - Tables - English Alexa traffic analysis for Wikipedia Wikipedia.org is more popular than... Other Wikipedias Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:Statistics" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Special page Variants Views More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools Upload file Special pages Printable version Languages Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/English_language |||English language From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For other uses, see English (disambiguation). English Pronunciation /????l??/[1] Region Originally England now worldwide (see Geographical distribution, below) Native speakers 360–400 million (2006)[2] L2 speakers: 400 million; as a foreign language: 600–700 million[2] Language family Indo-European Germanic West Germanic Ingvaeonic Anglo-Frisian Anglic English Early forms Old English Middle English Early Modern English Writing system Latin script (English alphabet) English Braille, Unified English Braille Signed forms Manually coded English (multiple systems) Official status Official language in 67 countries 27 non-sovereign entities Various organisations United Nations European Union Commonwealth of Nations Council of Europe ICC IOC ISO NATO WTO NAFTA OAS OECD OIC OPEC GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development* PIF UKUSA Agreement ASEAN ASEAN Economic Community SAARC Turkic Council ECO Language codes ISO 639-1 en ISO 639-2 eng ISO 639-3 eng Glottolog stan1293[3] Linguasphere 52-ABA   Countries of the world where English is a majority native language   Countries where English is official but not a majority native language This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. English i/????l??/ is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and is now the global lingua franca.[4][5] Named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to England, it ultimately derives its name from the Anglia (Angeln) peninsula in the Baltic Sea. It is most closely related to the Frisian languages, but its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages in the early medieval period, and later by Romance languages, particularly Latin and French.[6] English is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. It is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland, and New Zealand, and is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa, and South Asia.[7] It is the third most common native language in the world, after Mandarin and Spanish.[8] It is the most widely learned second language and an official language of the United Nations, of the European Union, and of many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a set of Anglo-Frisian dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the fifth century, are called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England, and was a period in which the language was influenced by French.[9] Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London and the King James Bible, and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.[10] Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, modern English spread around the world from the 17th to mid-20th centuries. Through all types of printed and electronic media, as well as the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and in professional contexts such as science, navigation, and law.[11] Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax.[12] Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. Despite noticeable variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions – in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar and spelling – English-speakers from around the world are able to communicate with one another with relative ease. Contents 1 Classification 2 History 2.1 Proto-Germanic to Old English 2.2 Middle English 2.3 Early Modern English 2.4 Spread of Modern English 3 Geographical distribution 3.1 Three circles of English-speaking countries 3.2 Pluricentric English 3.3 English as a global language 4 Phonology 4.1 Consonants 4.2 Vowels 4.3 Phonotactics 4.4 Stress, rhythm and intonation 4.5 Regional variation 5 Grammar 5.1 Nouns and noun phrases 5.1.1 Adjectives 5.1.2 Pronouns, case and person 5.1.3 Prepositions 5.2 Verbs and verb phrases 5.2.1 Tense, aspect and mood 5.2.2 Phrasal verbs 5.2.3 Adverbs 5.3 Syntax 5.3.1 Basic constituent order 5.3.2 Clause syntax 5.3.3 Auxiliary verb constructions 5.3.4 Questions 5.3.5 Discourse level syntax 6 Vocabulary 6.1 Word formation processes 6.2 Word origins 6.3 English loanwords and calques in other languages 7 Writing system 8 Dialects, accents, and varieties 8.1 UK and Ireland 8.2 North America 8.3 Australia and New Zealand 8.4 Africa, the Caribbean, and South Asia 9 References 10 Bibliography 11 External links Classification The Germanic languages in Europe The Anglo-Frisian languages   English   Scots   West Frisian   North Frisian   Saterland Frisian Phylogenetic tree showing the historical relations between the languages of the West Germanic branch of the Germanic languages English is an Indo-European language, and belongs to the West Germanic group of the Germanic languages.[13] Most closely related to English are the three Frisian languages: West Frisian, North Frisian and Saterland Frisian, with which English forms the Anglo-Frisian subgroup within West Germanic. Low German (Low Saxon) (nr. 19-24 on the map), which evolved from Old Saxon, is also closely related, and sometimes Low German, English, and Frisian are grouped together as the Ingvaeonic (North Sea Germanic) languages.[14] Furthermore, English is closely related to German, Dutch and Afrikaans. While Dutch and Afrikaans are classified as Franconian languages (nr. 25, 29 and 32), Standard German is based on Thuringian-Upper Saxon dialects (nr. 30), and therefore is more closely related to the North Sea Germanic languages. Since the Central German dialects (nr. 29-31) Standard German is based on, were, other than English, Dutch and Afrikaans (and also Low German), affected by the High German consonant shift, German seems more distantly related to English than Dutch and Afrikaans, since cognates often are not so easily recognizable, but still, English and German resemble each other to a high degree: English: The white wise flying ghost was friendly and his best friend was the green frog who sat under the elm and sang. German: Der weiße weise fliegende Geist war freundlich und sein bester Freund war der grüne Frosch der unter der Ulme saß und sang. Modern English descends from Middle English, which in turn descends from Old English.[15] Particular dialects of Old and Middle English also developed into a number of other English (Anglic) languages, including Scots[16] and the extinct Fingallian and Forth and Bargy (Yola) dialects of Ireland.[17] English is classified as a Germanic language because it shares new language features (different from other Indo-European languages) with other Germanic languages such as Dutch, German, and Swedish.[18] These shared innovations show that the languages have descended from a single common ancestor, which linguists call Proto-Germanic. Some shared features of Germanic languages are the use of modal verbs, the division of verbs into strong and weak classes, and the sound changes affecting Proto-Indo-European consonants, known as Grimm's and Verner's laws. Through Grimm's law, the word for foot begins with /f/ in Germanic languages, but its cognates in other Indo-European languages begin with /p/. English is classified as an Anglo-Frisian language because Frisian and English share other features, such as the palatalisation of consonants that were velar consonants in Proto-Germanic (see Phonological history of Old English § Palatalization).[19] English sing, sang, sung; Dutch zingen, zong, gezongen; German singen, sang, gesungen (strong verb) English laugh, laughed; Dutch and German lachen, lachte (weak verb) English foot, Dutch voet, German Fuß, Norwegian and Swedish fot (initial /f/ derived from Proto-Indo-European *p through Grimm's law) Latin pes, stem ped-; Modern Greek ???? pódi; Russian ??? pod; Sanskrit ??? pád (original Proto-Indo-European *p) English cheese, Frisian tsiis (ch and ts from palatalisation) German Käse and Dutch kaas (k without palatalisation) English, like the other insular Germanic languages, Icelandic and Faroese, developed independently of the continental Germanic languages and their influences. English is thus not mutually intelligible with any continental Germanic language, differing in vocabulary, syntax, and phonology, although some, such as Dutch, do show strong affinities with English, especially with its earlier stages.[20] Because English through its history has changed considerably in response to contact with other languages, particularly Old Norse and Norman French, some scholars have argued that English can be considered a mixed language or a creole – a theory called the Middle English creole hypothesis. Although the high degree of influence from these languages on the vocabulary and grammar of Modern English is widely acknowledged, most specialists in language contact do not consider English to be a true mixed language.[21][22] History Main article: History of the English language Proto-Germanic to Old English Main article: Old English The opening to the Old English epic poem Beowulf, handwritten in half-uncial script: H?æt ?? G?rde/na ing?ar dagum þ?od cyninga / þrym ge frunon... "Listen! We of the Spear-Danes from days of yore have heard of the glory of the folk-kings..." The earliest form of English is called Old English or Anglo-Saxon (c. 550–1066 CE). Old English developed from a set of North Sea Germanic dialects originally spoken along the coasts of Frisia, Lower Saxony, Jutland, and Southern Sweden by Germanic tribes known as the Angles, Saxons, and Jutes. In the fifth century, the Anglo-Saxons settled Britain and the Romans withdrew from Britain. By the seventh century, the Germanic language of the Anglo-Saxons became dominant in Britain, replacing the languages of Roman Britain (43–409 CE): Common Brittonic, a Celtic language, and Latin, brought to Britain by the Roman occupation.[23][24][25] England and English (originally Ænglaland and Ænglisc) are named after the Angles.[26] Old English was divided into four dialects: the Anglian dialects, Mercian and Northumbrian, and the Saxon dialects, Kentish and West Saxon.[27] Through the educational reforms of King Alfred in the ninth century and the influence of the kingdom of Wessex, the West Saxon dialect became the standard written variety.[28] The epic poem Beowulf is written in West Saxon, and the earliest English poem, Cædmon's Hymn, is written in Northumbrian.[29] Modern English developed mainly from Mercian, but the Scots language developed from Northumbrian. A few short inscriptions from the early period of Old English were written using a runic script.[30] By the sixth century, a Latin alphabet was adopted, written with half-uncial letterforms. It included the runic letters wynn ??? and thorn ?þ?, and the modified Latin letters eth ?ð?, and ash ?æ?.[30][31] Old English is very different from Modern English and difficult for 21st-century English speakers to understand. Its grammar was similar to that of modern German, and its closest relative is Old Frisian. Nouns, adjectives, pronouns, and verbs had many more inflectional endings and forms, and word order was much freer than in Modern English. Modern English has case forms in pronouns (he, him, his) and a few verb endings (I have, he has), but Old English had case endings in nouns as well, and verbs had more person and number endings.[32][33][34] The translation of Matthew 8:20 from 1000 CE shows examples of case endings (nominative plural, accusative plural, genitive singular) and a verb ending (present plural): Foxas habbað holu and heofonan fuglas nest Fox-as habb-að hol-u and heofon-an fugl-as nest-? fox-NOM.PL have-PRS.PL hole-ACC.PL and heaven-GEN.SG bird-NOM.PL nest-ACC.PL "Foxes have holes and the birds of heaven nests"[35] Middle English Main article: Middle English Englischmen þeyz hy hadde fram þe bygynnyng þre manner speche, Souþeron, Northeron, and Myddel speche in þe myddel of þe lond, … Noþeles by comyxstion and mellyng, furst wiþ Danes, and afterward wiþ Normans, in menye þe contray longage ys asperyed, and som vseþ strange wlaffyng, chyteryng, harryng, and garryng grisbytting. Although, from the beginning, Englishmen had three manners of speaking, southern, northern and midlands speech in the middle of the country, … Nevertheless, through intermingling and mixing, first with Danes and then with Normans, amongst many the country language has arisen, and some use strange stammering, chattering, snarling, and grating gnashing. “ ” John of Trevisa, ca. 1385[36] In the period from the 8th to the 12th century, Old English gradually transformed through language contact into Middle English. Middle English is often arbitrarily defined as beginning with the conquest of England by William the Conqueror in 1066, but it developed further in the period from 1200–1450. First, the waves of Norse colonisation of northern parts of the British Isles in the 8th and 9th centuries put Old English into intense contact with Old Norse, a North Germanic language. Norse influence was strongest in the Northeastern varieties of Old English spoken in the Danelaw area around York, which was the centre of Norse colonisation; today these features are still particularly present in Scots and Northern English. However the centre of norsified English seems to have been in the Midlands around Lindsey, and after 920 CE when Lindsey was reincorporated into the Anglo-Saxon polity, Norse features spread from there into English varieties that had not been in intense contact with Norse speakers. Some elements of Norse influence that persist in all English varieties today are the pronouns beginning with th- (they, them, their) which replaced the Anglo-Saxon pronouns with h- (hie, him, hera).[37] With the Norman conquest of England in 1066, the now norsified Old English language was subject to contact with the Old Norman language, a Romance language closely related to Modern French. The Norman language in England eventually developed into Anglo-Norman. Because Norman was spoken primarily by the elites and nobles, while the lower classes continued speaking Anglo-Saxon, the influence of Norman consisted of introducing a wide range of loanwords related to politics, legislation and prestigious social domains.[38] Middle English also greatly simplified the inflectional system, probably in order to reconcile Old Norse and Old English, which were inflectionally different but morphologically similar. The distinction between nominative and accusative case was lost except in personal pronouns, the instrumental case was dropped, and the use of the genitive case was limited to describing possession. The inflectional system regularised many irregular inflectional forms,[39] and gradually simplified the system of agreement, making word order less flexible.[40] By the Wycliffe Bible of the 1380s, the passage Matthew 8:20 was written Foxis han dennes, and briddis of heuene han nestis[41] Here the plural suffix -n on the verb have is still retained, but none of the case endings on the nouns are present. By the 12th century Middle English was fully developed, integrating both Norse and Norman features; it continued to be spoken until the transition to early Modern English around 1500. Middle English literature includes Geoffrey Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales, and Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur. In the Middle English period the use of regional dialects in writing proliferated, and dialect traits were even used for effect by authors such as Chaucer. Early Modern English Main article: Early Modern English Graphic representation of the Great Vowel Shift, showing how the pronunciation of the long vowels gradually shifted, with the high vowels i: and u: breaking into diphthongs and the lower vowels each shifting their pronunciation up one level The next period in the history of English was Early Modern English (1500–1700). Early Modern English was characterised by the Great Vowel Shift (1350–1700), inflectional simplification, and linguistic standardisation. The Great Vowel Shift affected the stressed long vowels of Middle English. It was a chain shift, meaning that each shift triggered a subsequent shift in the vowel system. Mid and open vowels were raised, and close vowels were broken into diphthongs. For example, the word bite was originally pronounced as the word beet is today, and the second vowel in the word about was pronounced as the word boot is today. The Great Vowel Shift explains many irregularities in spelling, since English retains many spellings from Middle English, and it also explains why English vowel letters have very different pronunciations from the same letters in other languages.[42][43] English began to rise in prestige during the reign of Henry V. Around 1430, the Court of Chancery in Westminster began using English in its official documents, and a new standard form of Middle English, known as Chancery Standard, developed from the dialects of London and the East Midlands. In 1476, William Caxton introduced the printing press to England and began publishing the first printed books in London, expanding the influence of this form of English.[44] Literature from the Early Modern period includes the works of William Shakespeare and the translation of the Bible commissioned by King James I. Even after the vowel shift the language still sounded different from Modern English: for example, the consonant clusters /kn ?n sw/ in knight, gnat, and sword were still pronounced. Many of the grammatical features that a modern reader of Shakespeare might find quaint or archaic represent the distinct characteristics of Early Modern English.[45] In the 1611 King James Version of the Bible, written in Early Modern English, Matthew 8:20 says: The Foxes haue holes and the birds of the ayre haue nests[35] This exemplifies the loss of case and its effects on sentence structure (replacement with Subject-Verb-Object word order, and the use of of instead of the non-possessive genitive), and the introduction of loanwords from French (ayre) and word replacements (bird originally meaning "nestling" had replaced OE fugol). Spread of Modern English By the late 18th century, the British Empire had facilitated the spread of English through its colonies and geopolitical dominance. Commerce, science and technology, diplomacy, art, and formal education all contributed to English becoming the first truly global language. English also facilitated worldwide international communication.[46][47] As England continued to form new colonies, these in turn became independent and developed their own norms for how to speak and write the language. English was adopted in North America, India, parts of Africa, Australasia, and many other regions. In the post-colonial period, some of the newly created nations that had multiple indigenous languages opted to continue using English as the official language to avoid the political difficulties inherent in promoting any one indigenous language above the others.[48][49][50] In the 20th century the growing economic and cultural influence of the United States and its status as a superpower following the Second World War has, along with worldwide broadcasting in English by the BBC[51] and other broadcasters, significantly accelerated the spread of the language across the planet.[52][53] By the 21st century, English was more widely spoken and written than any language has ever been.[54] A major feature in the early development of Modern English was the codification of explicit norms for standard usage, and their dissemination through official media such as public education and state sponsored publications. In 1755 Samuel Johnson published his A Dictionary of the English Language which introduced a standard set of spelling conventions and usage norms. In 1828, Noah Webster published the American Dictionary of the English language in an effort to establish a norm for speaking and writing American English that was independent from the British standard. Within Britain, non-standard or lower class dialect features were increasingly stigmatised, leading to the quick spread of the prestige varieties among the middle classes.[55] In terms of grammatical evolution, Modern English has now reached a stage where the loss of case is almost complete (case is now only found in pronouns, such as he and him, she and her, who and whom), and where SVO word-order is mostly fixed.[55] Some changes, such as the use of do-support have become universalised. (Earlier English did not use the word "do" as a general auxiliary as Modern English does; at first it was only used in question constructions where it was not obligatory.[56] Now, do-support with the verb have is becoming increasingly standardised.) The use of progressive forms in -ing, appears to be spreading to new constructions, and forms such as had been being built are becoming more common. Regularisation of irregular forms also slowly continues (e.g. dreamed instead of dreamt), and analytical alternatives to inflectional forms are becoming more common (e.g. more polite instead of politer). British English is also undergoing change under the influence of American English, fuelled by the strong presence of American English in the media and the prestige associated with the US as a world power. [57][58][59] Geographical distribution See also: List of territorial entities where English is an official language, List of countries by English-speaking population, and English-speaking world Percentage of English speakers by country.   80-100%   60-80%   40-60%   20-40%    0-20%   Not available As of 2016, 400 million people spoke English as their first language, and 1.1 billion spoke it as a secondary language.[60] English is probably the third largest language by number of native speakers, after Mandarin and Spanish.[8] However, when combining native and non-native speakers it may, depending on the estimate used, be the most commonly spoken language in the world.[54][61][62][63] English is spoken by communities on every continent and on oceanic islands in all the major oceans.[64] The countries in which English is spoken can be grouped into different categories by how English is used in each country. The "inner circle"[65] countries with many native speakers of English share an international standard of written English and jointly influence speech norms of English around the world. English does not belong to just one country, and it does not belong solely to descendants of English settlers. English is an official language of countries populated by few descendants of native speakers of English. It has also become by far the most important language of international communication when people who share no native language meet anywhere in the world. Three circles of English-speaking countries Braj Kachru distinguishes countries where English is spoken with a three circles model.[65] In his model, the "inner circle" countries are countries with large communities of native speakers of English, "outer circle" countries have small communities of native speakers of English but widespread use of English as a second language in education or broadcasting or for local official purposes, and "expanding circle" countries are countries where many learners learn English as a foreign language. Kachru bases his model on the history of how English spread in different countries, how users acquire English, and the range of uses English has in each country. The three circles change membership over time.[66] Braj Kachru's Three Circles of English. Countries with large communities of native speakers of English (the inner circle) include Britain, the United States, Australia, Canada, Ireland, and New Zealand, where the majority speaks English, and South Africa, where a significant minority speaks English. The countries with the most native English speakers are, in descending order, the United States (at least 231 million),[67] the United Kingdom (60 million),[68][69][70] Canada (19 million),[71] Australia (at least 17 million),[72] South Africa (4.8 million),[73] Ireland (4.2 million), and New Zealand (3.7 million).[74] In these countries, children of native speakers learn English from their parents, and local people who speak other languages or new immigrants learn English to communicate in their neighbourhoods and workplaces.[75] The inner-circle countries provide the base from which English spreads to other countries in the world.[66] Estimates of the number of English speakers who are second language and foreign-language speakers vary greatly from 470 million to more than 1,000 million depending on how proficiency is defined.[7] Linguist David Crystal estimates that non-native speakers now outnumber native speakers by a ratio of 3 to 1.[61] In Kachru's three-circles model, the "outer circle" countries are countries such as the Philippines,[76] Jamaica,[77] India, Pakistan[citation needed], Singapore,[78] and Nigeria[79][80] with a much smaller proportion of native speakers of English but much use of English as a second language for education, government, or domestic business, and where English is routinely used for school instruction and official interactions with the government.[81] Those countries have millions of native speakers of dialect continua ranging from an English-based creole to a more standard version of English. They have many more speakers of English who acquire English in the process of growing up through day by day use and listening to broadcasting, especially if they attend schools where English is the medium of instruction. Varieties of English learned by speakers who are not native speakers born to English-speaking parents may be influenced, especially in their grammar, by the other languages spoken by those learners.[75] Most of those varieties of English include words little used by native speakers of English in the inner-circle countries,[75] and they may have grammatical and phonological differences from inner-circle varieties as well. The standard English of the inner-circle countries is often taken as a norm for use of English in the outer-circle countries.[75] In the three-circles model, countries such as Poland, China, Brazil, Germany, Japan, Indonesia, Egypt, and other countries where English is taught as a foreign language make up the "expanding circle".[82] The distinctions between English as a first language, as a second language, and as a foreign language are often debatable and may change in particular countries over time.[81] For example, in the Netherlands and some other countries of Europe, knowledge of English as a second language is nearly universal, with over 80 percent of the population able to use it,[83] and thus English is routinely used to communicate with foreigners and often in higher education. In these countries, although English is not used for government business, the widespread use of English in these countries puts them at the boundary between the "outer circle" and "expanding circle". English is unusual among world languages in how many of its users are not native speakers but speakers of English as a second or foreign language.[84] Many users of English in the expanding circle use it to communicate with other people from the expanding circle, so that interaction with native speakers of English plays no part in their decision to use English.[85] Non-native varieties of English are widely used for international communication, and speakers of one such variety often encounter features of other varieties.[86] Very often today a conversation in English anywhere in the world may include no native speakers of English at all, even while including speakers from several different countries.[87] Pie chart showing the percentage of native English speakers living in "inner circle" English-speaking countries. Native speakers are now substantially outnumbered worldwide by second-language speakers of English (not counted in this chart).   US (64.3%)   UK (16.7%)   Canada (5.3%)   Australia (4.7%)   South Africa (1.3%)   Ireland (1.1%)   New Zealand (1%)   Other (5.6%) Pluricentric English English is a pluricentric language, which means that no one national authority sets the standard for use of the language.[88][89][90][91] But English is not a divided language,[92] despite a long-standing joke originally attributed to George Bernard Shaw that the United Kingdom and the United States are "two countries separated by a common language".[93] Spoken English, for example English used in broadcasting, generally follows national pronunciation standards that are also established by custom rather than by regulation. International broadcasters are usually identifiable as coming from one country rather than another through their accents,[94] but newsreader scripts are also composed largely in international standard written English. The norms of standard written English are maintained purely by the consensus of educated English-speakers around the world, without any oversight by any government or international organisation.[95] American listeners generally readily understand most British broadcasting, and British listeners readily understand most American broadcasting. Most English speakers around the world can understand radio programmes, television programmes, and films from many parts of the English-speaking world.[96] Both standard and nonstandard varieties of English can include both formal or informal styles, distinguished by word choice and syntax and use both technical and non-technical registers.[97] The settlement history of the English-speaking inner circle countries outside Britain helped level dialect distinctions and produce koineised forms of English in South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand.[98] The majority of immigrants to the United States without British ancestry rapidly adopted English after arrival. Now the majority of the United States population are monolingual English speakers,[99][67] although English has been given official status by only 30 of the 50 state governments of the US.[100][101] English as a global language English has ceased to be an "English language" in the sense of belonging only to people who are ethnically English.[102][103] Use of English is growing country-by-country internally and for international communication. Most people learn English for practical rather than ideological reasons.[104] Many speakers of English in Africa have become part of an "Afro-Saxon" language community that unites Africans from different countries.[105] As decolonisation proceeded throughout the British Empire in the 1950s and 1960s, former colonies often did not reject English but rather continued to use it as independent countries setting their own language policies.[49][50][106] For example, the view of the English language among many Indians has gone from associating it with colonialism to associating it with economic progress, and English continues to be an official language of India.[107] English is also widely used in media and literature, and the number of English language books published annually in India is the third largest in the world after the US and UK.[108] However English is rarely spoken as a first language, numbering only around a couple hundred-thousand people, and less than 5% of the population speak fluent English in India.[109][110] David Crystal claimed in 2004 that, combining native and non-native speakers, India now has more people who speak or understand English than any other country in the world,[111] but the number of English speakers in India is very uncertain, with most scholars concluding that the United States still has more speakers of English than India.[112] Modern English, sometimes described as the first global lingua franca,[52][113] is also regarded as the first world language.[114][115] English is the world's most widely used language in newspaper publishing, book publishing, international telecommunications, scientific publishing, international trade, mass entertainment, and diplomacy.[115] English is, by international treaty, the basis for the required controlled natural languages[116] Seaspeak and Airspeak, used as international languages of seafaring[117] and aviation.[118] English used to have parity with French & German in scientific research, but now it dominates that field.[119] It achieved parity with French as a language of diplomacy at the Treaty of Versailles negotiations in 1919.[120] By the time of the foundation of the United Nations at the end of World War II, English had become pre-eminent [121] and is now the main worldwide language of diplomacy and international relations.[122] It is one of six official languages of the United Nations.[123] Many other worldwide international organisations, including the International Olympic Committee, specify English as a working language or official language of the organisation. Many regional international organisations such as the European Free Trade Association, Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),[53] and Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) set English as their organisation's sole working language even though most members are not countries with a majority of native English speakers. While the European Union (EU) allows member states to designate any of the national languages as an official language of the Union, in practice English is the main working language of EU organisations.[124] Although in most countries English is not an official language, it is currently the language most often taught as a foreign language.[52][53] In the countries of the EU, English is the most widely spoken foreign language in nineteen of the twenty-five member states where it is not an official language (that is, the countries other than the UK, Ireland and Malta). In a 2012 official Eurobarometer poll, 38 percent of the EU respondents outside the countries where English is an official language said they could speak English well enough to have a conversation in that language. The next most commonly mentioned foreign language, French (which is the most widely known foreign language in the UK and Ireland), could be used in conversation by 12 percent of respondents.[125] A working knowledge of English has become a requirement in a number of occupations and professions such as medicine[126] and computing. English has become so important in scientific publishing that more than 80 percent of all scientific journal articles indexed by Chemical Abstracts in 1998 were written in English, as were 90 percent of all articles in natural science publications by 1996 and 82 percent of articles in humanities publications by 1995.[127] Specialised subsets of English arise spontaneously in international communities, for example, among international business people, as an auxiliary language. This has led some scholars to develop the study of English as an auxiliary languages. Globish uses a relatively small subset of English vocabulary (about 1500 words with highest use in international business English) in combination with the standard English grammar. Other examples include Simple English. The increased use of the English language globally has had an effect on other languages, leading to some English words being assimilated into the vocabularies of other languages. This influence of English has led to concerns about language death,[128] and to claims of linguistic imperialism,[129] and has provoked resistance to the spread of English; however the number of speakers continues to increase because many people around the world think that English provides them with opportunities for better employment and improved lives.[130] Although some scholars mention a possibility of future divergence of English dialects into mutually unintelligible languages, most think a more likely outcome is that English will continue to function as a koineised language in which the standard form unifies speakers from around the world.[131] English is used as the language for wider communication in countries around the world.[132] Thus English has grown in worldwide use much more than any constructed language proposed as an international auxiliary language, including Esperanto.[133][134] Phonology Main article: English phonology The phonetics and phonology of English differ between dialects, usually without interfering with mutual communication. Phonological variation affects the inventory of phonemes (speech sounds that distinguish meaning), and phonetic variation is differences in pronunciation of the phonemes.[135] This overview mainly describes the standard pronunciations of the United Kingdom and the United States: Received Pronunciation (RP) and General American (GA) (See Section below on "Dialects, accents and varieties"). The phonetic symbols used below are from the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA).[136][137][138] Consonants Main article: English phonology § Consonants Most English dialects share the same 24 consonant phonemes. The consonant inventory shown below is valid for Californian American English,[139] and for RP.[140] Consonant phonemes Labial Dental Alveolar Post- alveolar Palatal Velar Glottal Nasal m n ? Stop p b t d k ? Affricate t? d? Fricative f v ? ð s z ? ? h Approximant ?* j w Lateral l * Conventionally transcribed /r/. In the table, when obstruents (stops, affricates, and fricatives) appear in pairs, such as /p b/, /t? d?/, and /s z/, the first is fortis (strong) and the second is lenis (weak). Fortis obstruents, such as /p t? s/ are pronounced with more muscular tension and breath force than lenis consonants, such as /b d? z/, and are always voiceless. Lenis consonants are partly voiced at the beginning and end of utterances, and fully voiced between vowels. Fortis stops such as /p/ have additional articulatory or acoustic features in most dialects: they are aspirated [p?] when they occur alone at the beginning of a stressed syllable, often unaspirated in other cases, and often unreleased [p? ] or pre-glottalised [?p] at the end of a syllable. In a single-syllable word, a vowel before a fortis stop is shortened: thus nip has a noticeably shorter vowel (phonetically, but not phonemically) than nib [n??p?] (see below).[141] lenis stops: bin [b???n], about [??ba?t], nib [n??b?] fortis stops: pin [?p??n], spin [sp?n], happy [?hæpi], nip [?nip? ] or [?ni?p] In RP, the lateral approximant /l/, has two main allophones (pronunciation variants): the clear or plain [l], as in light, and the dark or velarised [?], as in full.[142] GA has dark l in most cases.[143] clear l: RP light [la?t] dark l: RP and GA full [f??], GA light [?a?t] All sonorants (liquids /l, r/ and nasals /m, n, ?/) devoice when following a voiceless obstruent, and they are syllabic when following a consonant at the end of a word.[144] voiceless sonorants: clay [?kl????] and snow [?sn?o?] syllabic sonorants: paddle [pad.l?], and button [b?t.n?] Vowels Main article: English phonology § Vowels The pronunciation of vowels varies a great deal between dialects and is one of the most detectable aspects of a speaker's accent. The table below lists the vowel phonemes in Received Pronunciation (RP) and General American (GA), with examples of words in which they occur from lexical sets compiled by linguists. The vowels are represented with symbols from the International Phonetic Alphabet; those given for RP are standard in British dictionaries and other publications. monophthongs RP GA word i? i need ? bid e ? bed æ back monophthongs RP GA word (?) ? roses ? comma ?? ?r bird ? but monophthongs RP GA word u? u food ? good ?? ? paw ? cloth ? box ?? bra diphthongs RP GA word e? bay ?? o? road a? cry a? cow ?? boy In RP, vowel length is phonemic; long vowels are marked with a triangular colon ??? in the table above, such as the vowel of need [ni?d] as opposed to bid [b?d]. GA does not have long vowels. In both RP and GA, vowels are phonetically shortened before fortis consonants in the same syllable, like /t t? f/, but not before lenis consonants like /d d? v/ or in open syllables: thus, the vowels of rich [r??t?], neat [ni?t], and safe [s???f] are noticeably shorter than the vowels of ridge [r?d?], need [ni?d], and save [se?v], and the vowel of light [l???t] is shorter than that of lie [la?]. Because lenis consonants are frequently voiceless at the end of a syllable, vowel length is an important cue as to whether the following consonant is lenis or fortis.[145] The vowels /? ?/ only occur in unstressed syllables and are a result of vowel reduction. Some dialects do not distinguish them, so that roses and comma end in the same vowel, a dialect feature called weak-vowel merger. GA has an unstressed r-coloured schwa /?/, as in butter [?b?t?], which in RP has the same vowel as the word-final vowel in comma. Phonotactics An English syllable includes a syllable nucleus consisting of a vowel sound. Syllable onset and coda (start and end) are optional. A syllable can start with up to three consonant sounds, as in sprint /spr?nt/, and end with up to four, as in texts /teksts/. This gives an English syllable the following structure, (CCC)V(CCCC) where C represents a consonant and V a vowel. The consonants that may appear together in onsets or codas are restricted, as is the order in which they may appear. Onsets can only have four types of consonant clusters: a stop and approximant, as in play; a voiceless fricative and approximant, as in fly or sly; s and a voiceless stop, as in stay; and s, a voiceless stop, and an approximant, as in string.[146] Clusters of nasal and stop are only allowed in codas. Clusters of obstruents always agree in voicing, and clusters of sibilants and of plosives with the same point of articulation are prohibited. Furthermore, several consonants have limited distributions: /h/ can only occur in syllable initial position, and /?/ only in syllable final position.[147] Stress, rhythm and intonation See also: Stress and vowel reduction in English and Intonation in English Stress plays an important role in English. Certain syllables are stressed, while others are unstressed. Stress is a combination of duration, intensity, vowel quality, and sometimes changes in pitch. Stressed syllables are pronounced longer and louder than unstressed syllables, and vowels in unstressed syllables are frequently reduced while vowels in stressed syllables are not.[148] Some words, primarily short function words but also some modal verbs such as can, have weak and strong forms depending on whether they occur in stressed or non-stressed position within a sentence. Stress in English is phonemic, and some pairs of words are distinguished by stress. For instance, the word contract is stressed on the first syllable (/?k?ntrækt/ KON-trakt) when used as a noun, but on the last syllable (/k?n?trækt/ k?n-TRAKT) for most meanings (for example, "reduce in size") when used as a verb.[149][150][151] Here stress is connected to vowel reduction: in the noun "contract" the first syllable is stressed and has the unreduced vowel /?/, but in the verb "contract" the first syllable is unstressed and its vowel is reduced to /?/. Stress is also used to distinguish between words and phrases, so that a compound word receives a single stress unit, but the corresponding phrase has two: e.g. to búrn óut versus a búrnout, and a hótdog versus a hót dóg.[152] In terms of rhythm, English is generally described as a stress-timed language, meaning that the amount of time between stressed syllables tends to be equal. Stressed syllables are pronounced longer, but unstressed syllables (syllables between stresses) are shortened. Vowels in unstressed syllables are shortened as well, and vowel shortening causes changes in vowel quality: vowel reduction. Regional variation Varieties of Standard English and their features[153] Phonological features United States Canada Republic of Ireland Northern Ireland Scotland England Wales South Africa Australia New Zealand father–bother merger yes yes /?/ is unrounded yes yes yes /??r/ is pronounced [?] yes yes yes yes cot–caught merger possibly yes possibly yes yes fool–full merger yes yes /t?d/ flapping (latter-ladder merger) yes yes possibly often rarely rarely rarely rarely yes often trap–bath split possibly possibly yes yes yes often yes non-rhotic (/r/-dropping after vowels) yes yes yes yes yes close vowels for /æ, ?/ yes yes yes /l/ can always be pronounced [?] yes yes yes yes yes yes /??r/ is fronted possibly yes yes Dialects and low vowels word RP GA Can sound change THOUGHT /?/ /?/ or /?/ /?/ cot–caught merger CLOTH /?/ lot–cloth split LOT /?/ father–bother merger PALM /??/ PLANT /æ/ /æ/ trap–bath split BATH TRAP /æ/ Varieties of English vary the most in pronunciation of vowels. The best known national varieties used as standards for education in non English-speaking countries are British (BrE) and American (AmE). Countries such as Canada, Australia, Ireland, New Zealand and South Africa have their own standard varieties which are less often used as standards for education internationally. Some differences between the various dialects are shown in the table "Varieties of Standard English and their features".[153] English has undergone many historical sound changes, some of them affecting all varieties, and others affecting only a few. Most standard varieties are affected by the Great Vowel Shift, which changed the pronunciation of long vowels, but a few dialects have slightly different results. In North America, a number of chain shifts such as the Northern Cities Vowel Shift and Canadian Shift have produced very different vowel landscapes in some regional accents. Some dialects have fewer or more consonant phonemes and phones than the standard varieties. Some conservative varieties like Scottish English have a voiceless [?] sound in whine that contrasts with the voiced [w] in wine, but most other dialects pronounce both words with voiced [w], a dialect feature called wine–whine merger. The unvoiced velar fricative sound /x/ is found in Scottish English, which distinguishes loch /l?x/ from lock /l?k/. Accents like Cockney with "h-dropping" lack the glottal fricative /h/, and dialects with th-stopping and th-fronting like African American Vernacular and Estuary English do not have the dental fricatives /?, ð/, but replace them with dental or alveolar stops /t, d/ or labiodental fricatives /f, v/.[154][155] Other changes affecting the phonology of local varieties are processes such as yod-dropping, yod-coalescence, and reduction of consonant clusters. General American and Received Pronunciation vary in their pronunciation of historical /r/ after a vowel at the end of a syllable (in the syllable coda). GA is a rhotic dialect, meaning that it pronounces /r/ at the end of a syllable, but RP is non-rhotic, meaning that it loses /r/ in that position. English dialects are classified as rhotic or non-rhotic depending on whether they elide /r/ like RP or keep it like GA.[156] There is complex dialectal variation in words with the open front and open back vowels /æ ?? ? ??/. These four vowels are only distinguished in RP, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. In GA, these vowels merge to three /æ ? ?/,[157] and in Canadian English they merge to two /æ ?/.[158] In addition, the words that have each vowel vary by dialect. The table "Dialects and open vowels" shows this variation with lexical sets in which these sounds occur. Grammar Main article: English grammar As is typical of an Indo-European language, English follows accusative morphosyntactic alignment. English distinguishes at least seven major word classes: verbs, nouns, adjectives, adverbs, determiners (i.e. articles), prepositions, and conjunctions. Some analyses add pronouns as a class separate from nouns, and subdivide conjunctions into subordinators and coordinators, and add the class of interjections.[159] English also has a rich set of auxiliary verbs, such as have and do, expressing the categories of mood and aspect. Questions are marked by do-support, wh-movement (fronting of question words beginning with wh-) and word order inversion with some verbs. Some traits typical of Germanic languages persist in English, such as the distinction between irregularly inflected strong stems inflected through ablaut (i.e. changing the vowel of the stem, as in the pairs speak/spoke and foot/feet) and weak stems inflected through affixation (such as love/loved, hand/hands). Vestiges of the case and gender system are found in the pronoun system (he/him, who/whom) and in the inflection of the copula verb to be. The seven word classes are exemplified in this sample sentence:[160] The chairman of the committee and the loquacious politician clashed violently when the meeting started Det. Noun Prep. Det. Noun Conj. Det. Adj. Noun Verb Advb. Conj. Det. Noun Verb Nouns and noun phrases English nouns are only inflected for number and possession. New nouns can be formed through derivation or compounding. They are semantically divided into proper nouns (names) and common nouns. Common nouns are in turn divided into concrete and abstract nouns, and grammatically into count nouns and mass nouns.[161] Most count nouns are inflected for plural number through the use of the plural suffix -s, but a few nouns have irregular plural forms. Mass nouns can only be pluralised through the use of a count noun classifier, e.g. one loaf of bread, two loaves of bread.[162] Regular plural formation: Singular: cat, dog Plural: cats, dogs Irregular plural formation: Singular: man, woman, foot, fish, ox, knife, mouse Plural: men, women, feet, fish, oxen, knives, mice Possession can be expressed either by the possessive enclitic -s (also traditionally called a genitive suffix), or by the preposition of. Historically the -s possessive has been used for animate nouns, whereas the of possessive has been reserved for inanimate nouns. Today this distinction is less clear, and many speakers use -s also with inanimates. Orthographically the possessive -s is separated from the noun root with an apostrophe. Possessive constructions: With -s: The woman's husband's child With of: The child of the husband of the woman Nouns can form noun phrases (NPs) where they are the syntactic head of the words that depend on them such as determiners, quantifiers, conjunctions or adjectives.[163] Noun phrases can be short, such as the man, composed only of a determiner and a noun. They can also include modifiers such as adjectives (e.g. red, tall, all) and specifiers such as determiners (e.g. the, that). But they can also tie together several nouns into a single long NP, using conjunctions such as and, or prepositions such as with, e.g. the tall man with the long red trousers and his skinny wife with the spectacles (this NP uses conjunctions, prepositions, specifiers and modifiers). Regardless of length, an NP functions as a syntactic unit. For example, the possessive enclitic can, in cases which do not lead to ambiguity, follow the entire noun phrase, as in The President of India's wife, where the enclitic follows India and not President. The class of determiners is used to specify the noun they precede in terms of definiteness, where the marks a definite noun and a or an an indefinite one. A definite noun is assumed by the speaker to be already known by the interlocutor, whereas an indefinite noun is not specified as being previously known. Quantifiers, which include one, many, some and all, are used to specify the noun in terms of quantity or number. The noun must agree with the number of the determiner, e.g. one man (sg.) but all men (pl.). Determiners are the first constituents in a noun phrase.[164] Adjectives Adjectives modify a noun by providing additional information about their referents. In English, adjectives come before the nouns they modify and after determiners.[165] In Modern English, adjectives are not inflected, and they do not agree in form with the noun they modify, as adjectives in most other Indo-European languages do. For example, in the phrases the slender boy, and many slender girls, the adjective slender does not change form to agree with either the number or gender of the noun. Some adjectives are inflected for degree of comparison, with the positive degree unmarked, the suffix -er marking the comparative, and -est marking the superlative: a small boy, the boy is smaller than the girl, that boy is the smallest. Some adjectives have irregular comparative and superlative forms, such as good, better, and best. Other adjectives have comparatives formed by periphrastic constructions, with the adverb more marking the comparative, and most marking the superlative: happier or more happy, the happiest or most happy.[166] There is some variation among speakers regarding which adjectives use inflected or periphrastic comparison, and some studies have shown a tendency for the periphrastic forms to become more common at the expense of the inflected form.[167] Pronouns, case and person English pronouns conserve many traits of case and gender inflection. The personal pronouns retain a difference between subjective and objective case in most persons (I/me, he/him, she/her, we/us, they/them) as well as a gender and animateness distinction in the third person singular (distinguishing he/she/it). The subjective case corresponds to the Old English nominative case, and the objective case is used both in the sense of the previous accusative case (in the role of patient, or direct object of a transitive verb), and in the sense of the Old English dative case (in the role of a recipient or indirect object of a transitive verb).[168][169] Subjective case is used when the pronoun is the subject of a finite clause, and otherwise the objective case is used.[170] While grammarians such as Henry Sweet[171] and Otto Jespersen[172] noted that the English cases did not correspond to the traditional Latin based system, some contemporary grammars, for example Huddleston & Pullum (2002), retain traditional labels for the cases, calling them nominative and accusative cases respectively. Possessive pronouns exist in dependent and independent forms; the dependent form functions as a determiner specifying a noun (as in my chair), while the independent form can stand alone as if it were a noun (e.g. the chair is mine).[173] The English system of grammatical person no longer has a distinction between formal and informal pronouns of address, and the forms for 2nd person plural and singular are identical except in the reflexive form. Some dialects have introduced innovative 2nd person plural pronouns such as y'all found in Southern American English and African American (Vernacular) English or youse and ye found in Irish English. English personal pronouns Person Subjective case Objective case Dependent possessive Independent possessive Reflexive 1st p. sg. I me my mine myself 2nd o. sg. you you your yours yourself 3rd p. sg. he/she/it him/her/it his/her/its his/hers/its himself/herself/itself 1st p. pl. we us our ours ourselves 2nd p. pl. you you your yours yourselves 3rd p. pl they them their theirs themselves Pronouns are used to refer to entities deictically or anaphorically. A deictic pronoun points to some person or object by identifying it relative to the speech situation — for example the pronoun I identifies the speaker, and the pronoun you, the addressee. Anaphorical pronouns such as that refer back to an entity already mentioned or assumed by the speaker to be known by the audience, for example in the sentence I already told you that. The reflexive pronouns are used when the oblique argument is identical to the subject of a phrase (e.g. "he sent it to himself" or "she braced herself for impact").[174] Prepositions Prepositional phrases (PP) are phrases composed of a preposition and one or more nouns, e.g. with the dog, for my friend, to school, in England. Prepositions have a wide range of uses in English. They are used to describe movement, place, and other relations between different entities, but they also have many syntactic uses such as introducing complement clauses and oblique arguments of verbs. For example, in the phrase I gave it to him, the preposition to marks the recipient, or Indirect Object of the verb to give. Traditionally words were only considered prepositions if they governed the case of the noun they preceded, for example causing the pronouns to use the objective rather than subjective form, "with her", "to me", "for us". But some contemporary grammars such as that of Huddleston & Pullum (2002:598–600) no longer consider government of case to be the defining feature of the class of prepositions, rather defining prepositions as words that can function as the heads of prepositional phrases. Verbs and verb phrases English verbs are inflected for tense and aspect, and marked for agreement with third person singular subject. Only the copula verb to be is still inflected for agreement with the plural and first and second person subjects.[166] Auxiliary verbs such as have and be are paired with verbs in the infinitive, past, or progressive forms. They form complex tenses, aspects, and moods. Auxiliary verbs differ from other verbs in that they can be followed by the negation, and in that they can occur as the first constituent in a question sentence.[175][176] Most verbs have six inflectional forms. The primary forms are a plain present, a third person singular present, and a preterite (past) form. The secondary forms are a plain form used for the infinitive, a gerund–participle and a past participle.[177] The copula verb to be is the only verb to retain some of its original conjugation, and takes different inflectional forms depending on the subject. The first person present tense form is am, the third person singular form is and the form are is used second person singular and all three plurals. The only verb past participle is been and its gerund-participle is being. English inflectional forms Inflection Strong Regular Plain present take love 3rd person sg. present takes loves Preterite took loved Plain (infinitive) take love Gerund–participle taking loving Past participle taken loved Tense, aspect and mood English has two primary tenses, past (preterit) and non-past. The preterit is inflected by using the preterit form of the verb, which for the regular verbs includes the suffix -ed, and for the strong verbs either the suffix -t or a change in the stem vowel. The non-past form is unmarked except in the third person singular, which takes the suffix -s.[175] Present Preterite First person I run I ran Second person You run You ran Third person John runs John ran English does not have a morphologised future tense.[178] Futurity of action is expressed periphrastically with one of the auxiliary verbs will or shall.[179] Many varieties also use a near future constructed with the phrasal verb be going to.[180] Future First person I will run Second person You will run Third person John will run Further aspectual distinctions are encoded by the use of auxiliary verbs, primarily have and be, which encode the contrast between a perfect and non-perfect past tense (I have run vs. I was running), and compound tenses such as preterite perfect (I had been running) and present perfect (I have been running).[181] For the expression of mood, English uses a number of modal auxiliaries, such as can, may, will, shall and the past tense forms could, might, would, should. There is also a subjunctive and an imperative mood, both based on the plain form of the verb (i.e. without the third person singular -s), and which is used in subordinate clauses (e.g. subjunctive: It is important that he run every day; imperative Run!).[179] An infinitive form, that uses the plain form of the verb and the preposition to, is used for verbal clauses that are syntactically subordinate to a finite verbal clause. Finite verbal clauses are those that are formed around a verb in the present or preterit form. In clauses with auxiliary verbs they are the finite verbs and the main verb is treated as a subordinate clause. For example, he has to go where only the auxiliary verb have is inflected for time and the main verb to go is in the infinitive, or in a complement clause such as I saw him leave, where the main verb is to see which is in a preterite form, and leave is in the infinitive. Phrasal verbs English also makes frequent use of constructions traditionally called phrasal verbs, verb phrases that are made up of a verb root and a preposition or particle which follows the verb. The phrase then functions as a single predicate. In terms of intonation the preposition is fused to the verb, but in writing it is written as a separate word. Examples of phrasal verbs are to get up, to ask out, to back up, to give up, to get together, to hang out, to put up with, etc. The phrasal verb frequently has a highly idiomatic meaning that is more specialised and restricted than what can be simply extrapolated from the combination of verb and preposition complement (e.g. lay off meaning terminate someone's employment).[182] In spite of the idiomatic meaning, some grammarians, including Huddleston & Pullum (2002):274, do not consider this type of construction to form a syntactic constituent and hence refrain from using the term "phrasal verb". Instead they consider the construction simply to be a verb with a prepositional phrase as its syntactic complement, i.e. he woke up in the morning and he ran up in the mountains are syntactically equivalent. Adverbs The function of adverbs is to modify the action or event described by the verb by providing additional information about the manner in which it occurs. Many adverbs are derived from adjectives with the suffix -ly, but not all, and many speakers tend to omit the suffix in the most commonly used adverbs. For example, in the phrase the woman walked quickly the adverb quickly derived from the adjective quick describes the woman's way of walking. Some commonly used adjectives have irregular adverbial forms, such as good which has the adverbial form well. Syntax In the English sentence The cat sat on the mat, the subject is the cat (a NP), the verb is sat, and on the mat is a prepositional phrase (composed of an NP the mat, and headed by the preposition on). The tree describes the structure of the sentence. Modern English syntax language is moderately analytic.[183] It has developed features such as modal verbs and word order as resources for conveying meaning. Auxiliary verbs mark constructions such as questions, negative polarity, the passive voice and progressive aspect. Basic constituent order English word order has moved from the Germanic verb-second (V2) word order to being almost exclusively subject–verb–object (SVO).[184] The combination of SVO order and use of auxiliary verbs often creates clusters of two or more verbs at the centre of the sentence, such as he had hoped to try to open it. In most sentences English only marks grammatical relations through word order.[185] The subject constituent precedes the verb and the object constituent follows it. The example below demonstrates how the grammatical roles of each constituent is marked only by the position relative to the verb: The dog bites the man S V O The man bites the dog S V O An exception is found in sentences where one of the constituents is a pronoun, in which case it is doubly marked, both by word order and by case inflection, where the subject pronoun precedes the verb and takes the subjective case form, and the object pronoun follows the verb and takes the objective case form. The example below demonstrates this double marking in a sentence where both object and subject is represented with a third person singular masculine pronoun: He hit him S V O Indirect objects (IO) of ditransitive verbs can be placed either as the first object in a double object construction (S V IO O), such as I gave Jane the book or in a prepositional phrase, such as I gave the book to Jane [186] Clause syntax Main article: English clause syntax In English a sentence may be composed of one or more clauses, that may in turn be composed of one or more phrases (e.g. Noun Phrases, Verb Phrases, and Prepositional Phrases). A clause is built around a verb, and includes its constituents, such as any NPs and PPs. Within a sentence one clause is always the main clause (or matrix clause) whereas other clauses are subordinate to it. Subordinate clauses may function as arguments of the verb in the main clause. For example, in the phrase I think (that) you are lying, the main clause is headed by the verb think, the subject is I, but the object of the phrase is the subordinate clause (that) you are lying. The subordinating conjunction that shows that the clause that follows is a subordinate clause, but it is often omitted.[187] Relative clauses are clauses that function as a modifier or specifier to some constituent in the main clause: For example, in the sentence I saw the letter that you received today, the relative clause that you received today specifies the meaning of the word letter, the object of the main clause. Relative clauses can be introduced by the pronouns who, whose, whom and which as well as by that (which can also be omitted.)[188] In contrast to many other Germanic languages there is no major differences between word order in main and subordinate clauses.[189] Auxiliary verb constructions Main articles: Do-support and Subject–auxiliary inversion English syntax relies on auxiliary verbs for many functions including the expression of tense, aspect and mood. Auxiliary verbs form main clauses, and the main verbs function as heads of a subordinate clause of the auxiliary verb. For example, in the sentence the dog did not find its bone, the clause find its bone is the complement of the negated verb did not. Subject–auxiliary inversion is used in many constructions, including focus, negation, and interrogative constructions. The verb do can be used as an auxiliary even in simple declarative sentences, where it usually serves to add emphasis, as in "I did shut the fridge." However, in the negated and inverted clauses referred to above, it is used because the rules of English syntax permit these constructions only when an auxiliary is present. Modern English does not allow the addition of the negating adverb not to an ordinary finite lexical verb, as in *I know not—it can only be added to an auxiliary (or copular) verb, hence if there is no other auxiliary present when negation is required, the auxiliary do is used, to produce a form like I do not (don't) know. The same applies in clauses requiring inversion, including most questions—inversion must involve the subject and an auxiliary verb, so it is not possible to say *Know you him?; grammatical rules require Do you know him?[190] Negation is done with the adverb not, which precedes the main verb and follows an auxiliary verb. A contracted form of not -n't can be used as an enclitic attaching to auxiliary verbs and to the copula verb to be. Just as with questions, many negative constructions require the negation to occur with do-support, thus in Modern English I don't know him is the correct answer to the question Do you know him?, but not *I know him not, although this construction may be found in older English.[191] Passive constructions also use auxiliary verbs. A passive construction rephrases an active construction in such a way that the object of the active phrase becomes the subject of the passive phrase, and the subject of the active phrase is either omitted or demoted to a role as an oblique argument introduced in a prepositional phrase. They are formed by using the past participle either with the auxiliary verb to be or to get, although not all varieties of English allow the use of passives with get. For example, putting the sentence she sees him into the passive becomes he is seen (by her), or he gets seen (by her).[192] Questions Both yes–no questions and wh-questions in English are mostly formed using subject–auxiliary inversion (Am I going tomorrow?, Where can we eat?), which may require do-support (Do you like her?, Where did he go?). In most cases, interrogative words (wh-words; e.g. what, who, where, when, why, how) appear in a fronted position. For example, in the question What did you see?, the word what appears as the first constituent despite being the grammatical object of the sentence. (When the wh-word is the subject or forms part of the subject, no inversion occurs: Who saw the cat?.) Prepositional phrases can also be fronted when they are the question's theme, e.g. To whose house did you go last night?. The personal interrogative pronoun who is the only interrogative pronoun to still show inflection for case, with the variant whom serving as the objective case form, although this form may be going out of use in many contexts.[193] Discourse level syntax At the discourse level English tends to use a topic-comment structure, where the known information (topic) precedes the new information (comment). Because of the strict SVO syntax, the topic of a sentence generally has to be the grammatical subject of the sentence. In cases where the topic is not the grammatical subject of the sentence, frequently the topic is promoted to subject position through syntactic means. One way of doing this is through a passive construction, the girl was stung by the bee. Another way is through a cleft sentence where the main clause is demoted to be a complement clause of a copula sentence with a dummy subject such as it or there, e.g. it was the girl that the bee stung, there was a girl who was stung by a bee.[194] Dummy subjects are also used in constructions where there is no grammatical subject such as with impersonal verbs (e.g., it is raining) or in existential clauses (there are many cars on the street). Through the use of these complex sentence constructions with informationally vacuous subjects, English is able to maintain both a topic comment sentence structure and a SVO syntax. Focus constructions emphasise a particular piece of new or salient information within a sentence, generally through allocating the main sentence level stress on the focal constituent. For example, the girl was stung by a bee (emphasising it was a bee and not for example a wasp that stung her), or The girl was stung by a bee (contrasting with another possibility, for example that it was the boy).[195] Topic and focus can also be established through syntactic dislocation, either preposing or postposing the item to be focused on relative to the main clause. For example, That girl over there, she was stung by a bee, emphasises the girl by preposition, but a similar effect could be achieved by postposition, she was stung by a bee, that girl over there, where reference to the girl is established as an "afterthought".[196] Cohesion between sentences is achieved through the use of deictic pronouns as anaphora (e.g. that is exactly what I mean where that refers to some fact known to both interlocutors, or then used to locate the time of a narrated event relative to the time of a previously narrated event).[197] Discourse markers such as oh, so or well, also signal the progression of ideas between sentences and help to create cohesion. Discourse markers are often the first constituents in sentences. Discourse markers are also used for stance taking in which speakers position themselves in a specific attitude towards what is being said, for example, no way is that true! (the idiomatic marker no way! expressing disbelief), or boy! I'm hungry (the marker boy expressing emphasis). While discourse markers are particularly characteristic of informal and spoken registers of English, they are also used in written and formal registers.[198] Vocabulary The vocabulary of English is vast, and counting exactly how many words English (or any language) has is impossible.[199][200][201] The Oxford Dictionaries suggest that there are at least a quarter of a million distinct English words.[199] Early studies of English vocabulary by lexicographers, the scholars who formally study vocabulary, compile dictionaries, or both, were impeded by a lack of comprehensive data on actual vocabulary in use from good-quality linguistic corpora,[202] collections of actual written texts and spoken passages. Many statements published before the end of the 20th century about the growth of English vocabulary over time, the dates of first use of various words in English, and the sources of English vocabulary will have to be corrected as new computerised analysis of linguistic corpus data becomes available.[201][203] Word formation processes English forms new words from existing words or roots in its vocabulary through a variety of processes. One of the most productive processes in English is conversion,[204] using a word with a different grammatical role, for example using a noun as a verb or a verb as a noun. Another productive word-formation process is nominal compounding,[201][203] producing compound words such as babysitter or ice cream or homesick.[204] A process more common in Old English than in Modern English, but still productive in Modern English, is the use of derivational suffixes (-hood, -ness, -ing, -ility) to derive new words from existing words (especially those of Germanic origin) or stems (especially for words of Latin or Greek origin). Formation of new words, called neologisms, based on Greek or Latin roots (for example television or optometry) is a highly productive process in English and in most modern European languages, so much so that it is often difficult to determine in which language a neologism originated. For this reason, lexicographer Philip Gove attributed many such words to the "international scientific vocabulary" (ISV) when compiling Webster's Third New International Dictionary (1961). Another active word-formation process in English is acronyms,[205] words formed by pronouncing as a single word abbreviations of longer phrases (e.g. NATO, laser). Word origins Main article: Lists of English loanwords by country or language of origin Source languages of English vocabulary[6][206] English, besides forming new words from existing words and their roots, also borrows words from other languages. This process of adding words from other languages is commonplace in many world languages, but English is characterised as being especially open to borrowing of foreign words throughout the last 1,000 years.[207] The most commonly used words in English are West Germanic.[208] The words in English learned first by children as they learn to speak, particularly the grammatical words that dominate the word count of both spoken and written texts, are the Germanic words inherited from the earliest periods of the development of Old English.[201] But one of the consequences of long language contact between French and English in all stages of their development is that the vocabulary of English has a very high percentage of "Latinate" words (derived from French, especially, and also from Latin or from other Romance languages).[209] French words from various periods of the development of French now make up one-third of the vocabulary of English.[210] English has also borrowed many words directly from Latin, the ancestor of the Romance languages, during all stages of its development.[203][201] Many of these words were earlier borrowed into Latin from Greek. Latin or Greek are still highly productive sources of stems used to form vocabulary of subjects learned in higher education such as the sciences, philosophy, and mathematics.[211] English continues to gain new loanwords and calques ("loan translations") from languages all over the world, and words from languages other than the ancestral Anglo-Saxon language make up about 60 percent of the vocabulary of English.[212] English has formal and informal speech registers, and informal registers, including child directed speech, tend to be made up predominantly of words of Anglo-Saxon origin, while the percentage of vocabulary that is of Latinate origin is higher in legal, scientific, and academic texts.[213][214] English loanwords and calques in other languages English has a strong influence on the vocabulary of other languages.[210][215] The influence of English comes from such factors as opinion leaders in other countries knowing the English language, the role of English as a world lingua franca, and the large number of books and films that are translated from English into other languages.[216] That pervasive use of English leads to a conclusion in many places that English is an especially suitable language for expressing new ideas or describing new technologies. Among varieties of English, it is especially American English that influences other languages.[217] Some languages, such as Chinese, write words borrowed from English mostly as calques, while others, such as Japanese, readily take in English loanwords written in sound-indicating script.[218] Dubbed films and television programmes are an especially fruitful source of English influence on languages in Europe.[218] Writing system See also: English alphabet, English braille, and English orthography Since the ninth century, English has been written in a Latin alphabet (also called Roman alphabet). Earlier Old English texts in Anglo-Saxon runes are only short inscriptions. The great majority of literary works in Old English that survive to today are written in the Roman alphabet.[30] The modern English alphabet contains 26 letters of the Latin script: a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, t, u, v, w, x, y, z (which also have capital forms: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W, X, Y, Z). The spelling system, or orthography, of English is multi-layered, with elements of French, Latin, and Greek spelling on top of the native Germanic system.[219] Further complications have arisen through sound changes with which the orthography has not kept pace.[42] Compared to European languages for which official organisations have promoted spelling reforms, English has spelling that is a less consistent indicator of pronunciation and standard spellings of words that are more difficult to guess from knowing how a word is pronounced.[220] There are also systematic spelling differences between British and American English. These situations have prompted proposals for spelling reform in English.[221] Although letters and speech sounds do not have a one-to-one correspondence in standard English spelling, spelling rules that take into account syllable structure, phonetic changes in derived words, and word accent are reliable for most English words.[222] Moreover, standard English spelling shows etymological relationships between related words that would be obscured by a closer correspondence between pronunciation and spelling, for example the words photograph, photography, and photographic,[222] or the words electricity and electrical. While few scholars agree with Chomsky and Halle (1968) that conventional English orthography is "near-optimal",[219] there is a rationale for current English spelling patterns.[223] The standard orthography of English is the most widely used writing system in the world.[224] Standard English spelling is based on a graphomorphemic segmentation of words into written clues of what meaningful units make up each word.[225] Readers of English can generally rely on the correspondence between spelling and pronunciation to be fairly regular for letters or digraphs used to spell consonant sounds. The letters b, d, f, h, j, k, l, m, n, p, r, s, t, v, w, y, z represent, respectively, the phonemes /b, d, f, h, d?, k, l, m, n, p, r, s, t, v, w, j, z/. The letters c and g normally represent /k/ and /?/, but there is also a soft c pronounced /s/, and a soft g pronounced /d?/. The differences in the pronunciations of the letters c and g are often signalled by the following letters in standard English spelling. Digraphs used to represent phonemes and phoneme sequences include ch for /t?/, sh for /?/, th for /?/ or /ð/, ng for /?/, qu for /kw/, and ph for /f/ in Greek-derived words. The single letter x is generally pronounced as /z/ in word-initial position and as /ks/ otherwise. There are exceptions to these generalisations, often the result of loanwords being spelled according to the spelling patterns of their languages of origin[222] or proposals by pedantic scholars in the early period of Modern English to mistakenly follow the spelling patterns of Latin for English words of Germanic origin.[226] For the vowel sounds of the English language, however, correspondences between spelling and pronunciation are more irregular. There are many more vowel phonemes in English than there are vowel letters (a, e, i, o, u, w, y). As a result of a smaller set of single letter symbols than the set of vowel phonemes, some "long vowels" are often indicated by combinations of letters (like the oa in boat, the ow in how, and the ay in stay), or the historically based silent e (as in note and cake).[223] The consequence of this complex orthographic history is that learning to read can be challenging in English. It can take longer for school pupils to become independently fluent readers of English than of many other languages, including Italian, Spanish, or German.[227] Nonetheless, there is an advantage for learners of English reading in learning the specific sound-symbol regularities that occur in the standard English spellings of commonly used words.[222] Such instruction greatly reduces the risk of children experiencing reading difficulties in English.[228][229] Making primary school teachers more aware of the primacy of morpheme representation in English may help learners learn more efficiently to read and write English.[230] English writing also includes a system of punctuation that is similar to the system of punctuation marks used in most alphabetic languages around the world. The purpose of punctuation is to mark meaningful grammatical relationships in sentences to aid readers in understanding a text and to indicate features important for reading a text aloud.[231] Dialects, accents, and varieties Main articles: List of dialects of the English language, World Englishes, and regional accents of English Dialectologists distinguish between English dialects, regional varieties that differ from each other in terms of grammar and vocabulary, and regional accents, distinguished by different patterns of pronunciation. The major native dialects of English are often divided by linguists into the two general categories of the British dialects (BrE) and those of North America (AmE).[232] There also exists a grouping of major native varieties of English in the southern hemisphere, the most prominent being Australian and New Zealand English. UK and Ireland See also: English language in England, Northern England English, Scots language, Scottish English, Welsh English, Estuary English, Ulster English, and Hiberno-English Map showing the main dialect regions in the UK and Ireland As the place where English first evolved, the British Isles, and particularly England, are home to the most variegated pattern of dialects. Within the United Kingdom, the Received Pronunciation (RP), an educated dialect of South East England, is traditionally used as the broadcast standard, and is considered the most prestigious of the British dialects. The spread of RP (also known as BBC English) through the media has caused many traditional dialects of rural England to recede, as youths adopt the traits of the prestige variety instead of traits from local dialects. At the time of the Survey of English Dialects, grammar and vocabulary differed across the country, but a process of lexical attrition has led most of this variation to disappear.[233] Nonetheless this attrition has mostly affected dialectal variation in grammar and vocabulary, and in fact only 3 percent of the English population actually speak RP, the remainder speaking regional accents and dialects with varying degrees of RP influence.[234] There is also variability within RP, particularly along class lines between Upper and Middle class RP speakers and between native RP speakers and speakers who adopt RP later in life.[235] Within Britain there is also considerable variation along lines of social class, and some traits though exceedingly common are considered "non-standard" and are associated with lower class speakers and identities. An example of this is H-dropping, which was historically a feature of lower class London English, particularly Cockney, but which today is the standard in all major English cities—yet it remains largely absent in broadcasting and among the upper crust of British society.[236] Speech example An example of an Essex male with a working-class Estuary accent (entertainer Russell Brand) Problems playing this file? See media help. English in England can be divided into four major dialect regions, Southwest English, South East English, Midlands English, and Northern English. Within each of these regions several local subdialects exist: Within the Northern region, there is a division between the Yorkshire dialects, and the Geordie dialect spoken in Northumbria around Newcastle, and the Lancashire dialects with local urban dialects in Liverpool (Scouse) and Manchester (Mancunian). Having been the centre of Danish occupation during the Viking Invasions, Northern English dialects, particularly the Yorkshire dialect, retain Norse features not found in other English varieties.[237] Since the 15th century, Southeastern varieties centred around London, which has been the centre from which dialectal innovations have spread to other dialects. In London, the Cockney dialect was traditionally used by the lower classes, and it was long a socially stigmatised variety. Today a large area of Southeastern England has adopted traits from Cockney, resulting in the so-called Estuary English which spread in areas south and East of London beginning in the 1980s. Estuary English is distinguished by traits such as the use of intrusive R (drawing is pronounced drawring /?dr??r??/), t-glottalisation (Potter is pronounced with a glottal stop as Po'er /po??/), and the pronunciation of th- as /f/ (thanks pronounced fanks) or /v/ (bother pronounced bover). [238] Speech example An example of a Scottish male with a middle-class Renfrewshire accent Problems playing this file? See media help. Scots is today considered a separate language from English, but it has its origins in early Northern Middle English[239] and developed and changed during its history with influence from other sources, particularly Scots Gaelic and Old Norse. Scots itself has a number of regional dialects. And in addition to Scots, Scottish English are the varieties of Standard English spoken in Scotland, most varieties are Northern English accents, with some influence from Scots.[240] In Ireland, various forms of English have been spoken since the Norman invasions of the 11th century. In County Wexford, in the area surrounding Dublin, two highly conservative dialects known as Forth and Bargy and Fingallian developed as offshoots from Early Middle English, and were spoken until the 19th century. Modern Hiberno-English however has its roots in English colonisation in the 17th century. Today Irish English is divided into Ulster English, a dialect with strong influence from Scots, and southern Hiberno-English. Like Scots and Northern English, the Irish accents preserve the rhoticity which has been lost in most dialects influenced by RP.[17][241] North America Main articles: American English, General American, African American Vernacular English, Southern American English, and Canadian English Rhoticity dominates in North American English. The Atlas of North American English found over 50% non-rhoticity, though, in at least one local white speaker in each U.S. metropolitan area designated here by a red dot. Non-rhotic African American Vernacular English pronunciations may be found among African Americans regardless of location. American English is fairly homogeneous compared to British English. Today, American accent variation is often increasing at the regional level and decreasing at the very local level,[242] though most Americans still speak within a phonological continuum of similar accents,[243] known collectively as General American (GA), with differences hardly noticed even among Americans themselves (such as Midland and Western American English).[244][245][246] In most American and Canadian English, rhoticity (or r-fulness) is dominant, with non-rhoticity (r-dropping) becoming associated with lower prestige and social class especially after World War II; this contrasts with the situation in England, where non-rhoticity has become the standard.[247] Separate from GA are American dialects with clearly distinct sound systems, historically including Southern American English, English of the coastal Northeast (famously including Eastern New England English and New York City English), and African American Vernacular English, all of which are historically non-rhotic. Canadian English, except for the Atlantic provinces and perhaps Quebec, may be classified under GA as well, but it often shows raising of certain vowels, /a?/ and /a?/, before voiceless consonants, as well as distinct norms for written and pronunciation standards.[248] In Southern American English, the largest American "accent group" outside of GA,[249] rhoticity now strongly prevails, replacing the region's historical non-rhotic prestige.[250][251][252] Southern accents are colloquially described as a "drawl" or "twang,"[253] being recognised most readily by the Southern Vowel Shift that begins with glide-deleting in the /a?/ vowel (e.g. pronouncing spy almost like spa), the "Southern breaking" of several front pure vowels into a gliding vowel or even two syllables (e.g. pronouncing the word "press" almost like "pray-us"),[254] the pin–pen merger, and other distinctive phonological, grammatical, and lexical features, many of which are actually recent developments of the 19th century or later.[255] Today spoken primarily by working- and middle-class African Americans, African American Vernacular English (AAVE) is also largely non-rhotic and likely originated among enslaved Africans and African Americans influenced primarily by the non-rhotic, non-standard English dialects of the Old South. A minority of linguists,[256] contrarily, propose that AAVE mostly traces back to African languages spoken by the slaves who had to develop a pidgin or Creole English to communicate with slaves of other ethnic and linguistic origins.[257] AAVE shares important commonalities with older Southern American English and so probably developed to a highly coherent and homogeneous variety in the 19th or early 20th century. AAVE is commonly stigmatised in North America as a form of "broken" or "uneducated" English, also common of modern Southern American English, but linguists today recognise both as fully developed varieties of English with their own norms shared by a large speech community.[258][259] Australia and New Zealand Main articles: Australian English and New Zealand English Since 1788, English has been spoken in Oceania, and Australian English has developed as a first language of the vast majority of the inhabitants of the Australian continent, its standard accent being General Australian. The English of neighbouring New Zealand has to a lesser degree become an influential standard variety of the language.[260] Australian and New Zealand English are most closely related to each other with few differentiating characteristics, followed by South African English and the English of southeastern England, all of which have similarly non-rhotic accents, aside from some accents in the South Island of New Zealand. Australian and New Zealand English stand out for their innovative vowels: many short vowels are fronted or raised, whereas many long vowels have diphthongised. Australian English also has a contrast between long and short vowels, not found in most other varieties. Australian English grammar aligns closely to British and American English; like American English, collective plural subjects take on a singular verb (as in the government is rather than are).[261][262] New Zealand English uses [?] for ?wh-? and its front vowels are often even higher than in Australian English.[263][264][265] Africa, the Caribbean, and South Asia See also: South African English, Caribbean English, and Indian English English is spoken widely in South Africa and is an official or co-official language in several countries. In South Africa, English has been spoken since 1820, co-existing with Afrikaans and various African languages such as the Khoe and Bantu languages. Today about 9 percent of the South African population speak South African English (SAE) as a first language. SAE is a non-rhotic variety, which tends to follow RP as a norm. It is alone among non-rhotic varieties in lacking intrusive r. There are different L2 varieties that differ based on the native language of the speakers.[266] Most phonological differences from RP are in the vowels.[267] Consonant differences include the tendency to pronounce /p, t, t??, k/ without aspiration (e.g. pin pronounced [p?n] rather than as [p??n] as in most other varieties), while r is often pronounced as a flap [?] instead of as the more common fricative.[268] Several varieties of English are also spoken in the Caribbean Islands that were colonial possessions of Britain, including Jamaica, and the Leeward and Windward Islands and Trinidad and Tobago, Barbados, the Cayman Islands, and Belize. Each of these areas are home both to a local variety of English and a local English based creole, combining English and African languages. The most prominent varieties are Jamaican English and Jamaican Creole. In Central America, English based creoles are spoken in on the Caribbean coasts of Nicaragua and Panama. [269] Locals are often fluent both in the local English variety and the local creole languages and code-switching between them is frequent, indeed another way to conceptualise the relationship between Creole and Standard varieties is to see a spectrum of social registers with the Creole forms serving as "basilect" and the more RP-like forms serving as the "acrolect", the most formal register.[270] Most Caribbean varieties are based on British English and consequently most are non-rhotic, except for formal styles of Jamaican English which are often rhotic. Jamaican English differs from RP in its vowel inventory, which has a distinction between long and short vowels rather than tense and lax vowels as in Standard English. The diphthongs /ei/ and /ou/ are monophthongs [e?] and [o?] or even the reverse diphthongs [ie] and [uo] (e.g. bay and boat pronounced [b?e?] and [b?o?t]). Often word final consonant clusters are simplified so that "child" is pronounced [t??ail] and "wind" [win].[271][272][273] As a historical legacy, Indian English tends to take RP as its ideal, and how well this ideal is realised in an individual's speech reflects class distinctions among Indian English speakers. Indian English accents are marked by the pronunciation of phonemes such as /t/ and /d/ (often pronounced with retroflex articulation as [?] and [?]) and the replacement of /?/ and /ð/ with dentals [t?] and [d?]. Sometimes Indian English speakers may also use spelling based pronunciations where the silent ?h? found in words such as ghost is pronounced as an Indian voiced aspirated stop [??].[274] References ^ OxfordLearner'sDictionary 2015, Entry: English – Pronunciation. ^ a b Crystal 2006, pp. 424–426. ^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin; Bank, Sebastian, eds. (2016). "Standard English". Glottolog 2.7. Jena: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History.  ^ Crystal 2003a, p. 6. ^ Wardhaugh 2010, p. 55. ^ a b Finkenstaedt, Thomas; Dieter Wolff (1973). Ordered profusion; studies in dictionaries and the English lexicon. C. Winter. ISBN 3-533-02253-6.  ^ a b Crystal 2003b, pp. 108–109. ^ a b Ethnologue 2010. ^ Crystal 2003b, p. 30. ^ "How English evolved into a global language". BBC. 20 December 2010. Retrieved 9 August 2015.  ^ The Routes of English 2015. ^ König 1994, p. 539. ^ Bammesberger 1992, pp. 29–30. ^ Bammesberger 1992, p. 30. ^ Robinson 1992. ^ Romaine 1982, pp. 56–65. ^ a b Barry 1982, pp. 86–87. ^ Durrell 2006. ^ König & van der Auwera 1994. ^ Harbert 2007. ^ Thomason & Kaufman 1988, pp. 264–265. ^ Watts 2011, Chapter 4. ^ Collingwood & Myres 1936. ^ Graddol, Leith & Swann et al. 2007. ^ Blench & Spriggs 1999. ^ Bosworth & Toller 1921. ^ Campbell 1959, p. 4. ^ Toon 1992, Chapter: Old English Dialects. ^ Donoghue 2008. ^ a b c Gneuss 2013, p. 23. ^ Denison & Hogg 2006, pp. 30–31. ^ Hogg 1992, Chapter 3. Phonology and Morphology. ^ Smith 2009. ^ Trask & Trask 2010. ^ a b Lass 2006, pp. 46–47. ^ Hogg 2006, pp. 360–361. ^ Thomason & Kaufman 1988, pp. 284–290. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 39. ^ Lass 1992. ^ Fischer & van der Wurff 2006, pp. 111–13. ^ Wycliffe, John. "Bible" (PDF). Wesley NNU.  ^ a b Lass 2000. ^ Görlach 1991, pp. 66–70. ^ Nevalainen & Tieken-Boon van Ostade 2006, pp. 274–79. ^ Cercignani 1981. ^ How English evolved into a global language 2010. ^ The Routes of English. ^ Romaine 2006, p. 586. ^ a b Mufwene 2006, p. 614. ^ a b Northrup 2013, pp. 81–86. ^ Baker, Colin (August 1998). "Encyclopedia of Bilingualism and Bilingual Education, page CCCXI". Multilingual Matters Ltd. Retrieved 9 August 2015.  ^ a b c Graddol 2006. ^ a b c Crystal 2003a. ^ a b McCrum, MacNeil & Cran 2003, pp. 9–10. ^ a b Romaine 1999, pp. 1–56. ^ Romaine 1999, p. 2. ^ Leech et al. 2009, pp. 18–19. ^ Mair & Leech 2006. ^ Mair 2006. ^ "Which countries are best at English as a second language?". World Economic Forum. Retrieved 29 November 2016.  ^ a b Crystal 2003a, p. 69. ^ "English". Ethnologue. Retrieved 2016-10-29.  ^ "Chinese, Mandarin". Ethnologue. Retrieved 2016-10-29.  ^ Crystal 2003b, p. 106. ^ a b Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 2. ^ a b Kachru 2006, p. 196. ^ a b Ryan 2013, Table 1. ^ Office for National Statistics 2013, Key Points. ^ National Records of Scotland 2013. ^ Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency 2012, Table KS207NI: Main Language. ^ Statistics Canada 2014. ^ Australian Bureau of Statistics 2013. ^ Statistics South Africa 2012, Table 2.5 Population by first language spoken and province (number). ^ Statistics New Zealand 2014. ^ a b c d Bao 2006, p. 377. ^ Rubino 2006. ^ Patrick 2006a. ^ Lim & Ansaldo 2006. ^ Connell 2006. ^ Schneider 2007. ^ a b Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 5. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 4. ^ European Commission 2012. ^ Kachru 2006, p. 197. ^ Kachru 2006, p. 198. ^ Bao 2006. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 7. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 2. ^ Romaine 1999. ^ Baugh & Cable 2002. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, pp. 8–9. ^ Ammon 2008, p. 1539. ^ Marsh, David (26 November 2010). "Lickety splits: two nations divided by a common language". The Guardian (UK). Retrieved 26 December 2015.  ^ Trudgill 2006. ^ Ammon 2008, pp. 1537–1539. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 122. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, pp. 5–6. ^ Deumert 2006, p. 130. ^ Deumert 2006, p. 131. ^ Crawford, James (1 February 2012). "Language Legislation in the U.S.A.". languagepolicy.net. Retrieved 29 May 2013.  ^ "States with Official English Laws". us-english.org. Retrieved 29 May 2013.  ^ Romaine 1999, p. 5. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 1. ^ Kachru 2006, p. 195. ^ Mazrui & Mazrui 1998. ^ Mesthrie 2010, p. 594. ^ Annamalai 2006. ^ Sailaja 2009, pp. 2–9. ^ "Indiaspeak: English is our 2nd language – The Times of India". The Times of India. Retrieved 5 January 2016.  ^ "Human Development in India: Challenges for a Society in Transition" (PDF). Oxford University Press. 2005. Retrieved 5 January 2016.  ^ Crystal 2004b. ^ Graddol 2010. ^ Meierkord 2006, p. 165. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006, p. 690–91. ^ a b Northrup 2013. ^ Wojcik 2006, p. 139. ^ International Maritime Organization 2011. ^ International Civil Aviation Organization 2011. ^ Gordin 2015. ^ Phillipson 2004, p. 47. ^ ConradRubal-Lopez 1996, p. 261. ^ Richter 2012, p. 29. ^ United Nations 2008. ^ Ammon 2006, p. 321. ^ European Commission 2012, pp. 21, 19. ^ Alcaraz Ariza & Navarro 2006. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006, p. 694–95. ^ Crystal 2002. ^ Jambor 2007. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, Chapter 12: English into the Future. ^ Crystal 2006. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006. ^ Li 2003. ^ Meierkord 2006, p. 163. ^ Wolfram 2006, pp. 334–335. ^ Carr & Honeybone 2007. ^ Bermúdez-Otero & McMahon 2006. ^ MacMahon 2006. ^ International Phonetic Association 1999, pp. 41–42. ^ König 1994, p. 534. ^ Collins & Mees 2003, pp. 47–53. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 13. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 41. ^ Brinton & Brinton 2010, pp. 56–59. ^ Collins & Mees 2003, pp. 46–50. ^ Brinton & Brinton 2010, p. 60. ^ König 1994, pp. 537–538. ^ International Phonetic Association 1999, p. 42. ^ Oxford Learner's Dictionary 2015, Entry "contract". ^ Merriam Webster 2015, Entry "contract". ^ Macquarie Dictionary 2015, Entry "contract". ^ Brinton & Brinton 2010, p. 66. ^ a b Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 4–6. ^ Roach 2009, p. 53. ^ Giegerich 1992, p. 36. ^ Lass 2000, p. 114. ^ Wells 1982, pp. xviii-xix. ^ Wells 1982, p. 493. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 22. ^ Aarts & Haegeman (2006), p. 118. ^ Payne & Huddleston 2002. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 56–57. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 55. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 54–5. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 57. ^ a b König 1994, p. 540. ^ Mair 2006, pp. 148–49. ^ Leech 2006, p. 69. ^ O'Dwyer 2006. ^ Greenbaum & Nelson 2002. ^ Sweet 2014, p. 52. ^ Jespersen 2007. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 425–26. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 426. ^ a b Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 51. ^ König 1994, p. 541. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 50. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 208–210. ^ a b Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 51–52. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 210–11. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 50–51. ^ Dixon 1982. ^ McArthur 1992, pp. 64, 610–611. ^ König 1994, p. 553. ^ König 1994, p. 550. ^ König 1994, p. 551. ^ Miller 2002, pp. 60–69. ^ König 1994, p. 545. ^ König 1994, p. 557. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 114. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 786–790. ^ Miller 2002, pp. 26–27. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 7-8. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 1365–70. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 1370. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 1366. ^ Halliday & Hasan 1976. ^ Schiffrin 1988. ^ a b HowManyWords 2015. ^ Sheidlower 2006. ^ a b c d e Algeo 1999. ^ Leech et al. 2009, pp. 24–50. ^ a b c Kastovsky 2006. ^ a b Crystal 2003b, p. 129. ^ Crystal 2003b, pp. 120–121. ^ "Joseph M. Willams, Origins of the English Language at". Amazon.com. Retrieved 2010-04-21.  ^ Denning, Kessler & Leben 2007, p. 7. ^ Nation 2001, p. 265. ^ Denning, Kessler & Leben 2007. ^ a b Gottlieb 2006, p. 196. ^ Romaine 1999, p. 4. ^ Fasold & Connor-Linton 2014, p. 302. ^ Crystal 2003b, pp. 124–127. ^ Algeo 1999, pp. 80–81. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006, p. 692. ^ Gottlieb 2006, p. 197. ^ Gottlieb 2006, p. 198. ^ a b Gottlieb 2006, p. 202. ^ a b Swan 2006, p. 149. ^ Mountford 2006. ^ Neijt 2006. ^ a b c d Daniels & Bright 1996, p. 653. ^ a b Abercrombie & Daniels 2006. ^ Mountford 2006, p. 156. ^ Mountford 2006, pp. 157–158. ^ Daniels & Bright 1996, p. 654. ^ Dehaene 2009. ^ McGuinness 1997. ^ Shaywitz 2003. ^ Mountford 2006, pp. 159. ^ Lawler 2006, p. 290. ^ Crystal 2003b, p. 107. ^ Trudgill 2000, p. 125. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 3. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 37. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 40. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 31. ^ Trudgill 2000, pp. 80–81. ^ Aitken & McArthur 1979, p. 81. ^ Romaine 1982. ^ Hickey 2007. ^ Labov 2012. ^ Wells 1982, p. 34. ^ Rowicka 2006. ^ Toon 1982. ^ Cassidy 1982. ^ Labov 1972. ^ Boberg 2010. ^ "Do You Speak American: What Lies Ahead". PBS. Retrieved 15 August 2007.  ^ Thomas, Erik R. (2003), "Rural White Southern Accents" (PDF), Atlas of North American English (online), Mouton de Gruyter, p. 16. [Later published as a chapter in: Bernd Kortmann and Edgar W. Schneider (eds) (2004). A Handbook of Varieties of English: A Multimedia Reference Tool. New York: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 300-324.]  ^ Levine & Crockett 1966. ^ Schönweitz 2001. ^ Montgomery 1993. ^ Thomas 2008, p. 95–96. ^ Bailey 1997. ^ McWhorter, John H. (2001). Word on the Street: Debunking the Myth of a "Pure" Standard English. Basic Books. p. 162.  ^ Bailey 2001. ^ Green 2002. ^ Patrick 2006b. ^ Eagleson 1982. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 16–21. ^ Burridge 2010. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 24–26. ^ Maclagan 2010. ^ Gordon, Campbell & Hay et al. 2004. ^ Lanham 1982. ^ Lass 2002. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 30–31. ^ Lawton 1982. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, p. 115. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 117–18. ^ Lawton 1982, p. 256–60. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 115–16. ^ Sailaja 2009, pp. 19–24. Bibliography Aarts, Bas; Haegeman, Liliane (2006). "6. English Word classes and Phrases". In Aarts, Bas; McMahon, April. The Handbook of English Linguistics. Blackwell Publishing Ltd.  Abercrombie, D.; Daniels, Peter T. (2006). "Spelling Reform Proposals: English". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04878-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Aitken, A. J.; McArthur, Tom, eds. (1979). Languages of Scotland. Occasional paper – Association for Scottish Literary Studies; no. 4. Edinburgh: Chambers. ISBN 978-0-550-20261-1.  Alcaraz Ariza, M. Á.; Navarro, F. (2006). "Medicine: Use of English". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 752–759. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/02351-8. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Algeo, John (1999). "Chapter 2:Vocabulary". In Romaine, Suzanne. Cambridge History of the English Language. IV: 1776–1997. Cambridge University Press. pp. 57–91. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521264778.003. ISBN 978-0-521-26477-8.  Ammon, Ulrich (November 2006). "Language Conflicts in the European Union: On finding a politically acceptable and practicable solution for EU institutions that satisfies diverging interests". International Journal of Applied Linguistics. 16 (3): 319–338. doi:10.1111/j.1473-4192.2006.00121.x.  Ammon, Ulrich (2008). "Pluricentric and Divided Languages". In Ammon, Ulrich N.; Dittmar, Norbert; Mattheier, Klaus J.; et al. Sociolinguistics: An International Handbook of the Science of Language and Society / Soziolinguistik Ein internationales Handbuch zur Wissenschaft vov Sprache and Gesellschaft. Handbooks of Linguistics and Communication Science / Handbücher zur Sprach- und Kommunikationswissenschaft 3/2. 2 (2nd completely revised and extended ed.). de Gruyter. ISBN 978-3-11-019425-8. Retrieved 19 December 2014 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Annamalai, E. (2006). "India: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 610–613. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04611-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Australian Bureau of Statistics (28 March 2013). "2011 Census QuickStats: Australia". Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Bailey, Guy (2001). "Chapter 3: The relationship between African American and White Vernaculars". In Lanehart, Sonja L. Sociocultural and historical contexts of African American English. Varieties of English around the World. John Benjamins. pp. 53–84. ISBN 978-1-58811-046-6.  Bailey, G. (1997). "When did southern American English begin". In Edgar W. Schneider. Englishes around the world. pp. 255–275.  Bammesberger, Alfred (1992). "Chapter 2: The Place of English in Germanic and Indo-European". In Hogg, Richard M. The Cambridge History of the English Language. 1: The Beginnings to 1066. Cambridge University Press. pp. 26–66. ISBN 978-0-521-26474-7.  Bao, Z. (2006). "Variation in Nonnative Varieties of English". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 377–380. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04257-7. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Barry, Michael V. (1982). "English in Ireland". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 84–134. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Bauer, Laurie; Huddleston, Rodney (15 April 2002). "Chapter 19: Lexical Word-Formation". In Huddleston, Rodney; Pullum, Geoffrey K. The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 1621–1721. ISBN 978-0-521-43146-0. Retrieved 10 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (10 February 2015).  Baugh, Albert C.; Cable, Thomas (2002). A History of the English Language (5th ed.). Longman. ISBN 978-0-13-015166-7.  Bermúdez-Otero, Ricardo; McMahon, April (2006). "Chapter 17: English phonology and morphology". In Bas Aarts; April McMahon. The Handbook of English Linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 382–410. doi:10.1111/b.9781405113823.2006.00018.x. ISBN 978-1-4051-6425-2. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  Blench, R.; Spriggs, Matthew (1999). Archaeology and Language: Correlating Archaeological and Linguistic Hypotheses. Routledge. pp. 285–286. ISBN 978-0-415-11761-6.  Boberg, Charles (2010). The English language in Canada: Status, history and comparative analysis. Studies in English Language. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-139-49144-0. Lay summary (2 April 2015).  Bosworth, Joseph; Toller, T. Northcote (1921). "Engla land". An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary (Online). Charles University. Retrieved 6 March 2015.  Brinton, Laurel J.; Brinton, Donna M. (2010). The linguistic structure of modern English. John Benjamins. ISBN 978-902728824-0. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  Brutt-Griffler, J. (2006). "Languages of Wider Communication". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 690–697. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00644-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Burridge, Kate (2010). "Chapter 7: English in Australia". In Kirkpatrick, Andy. The Routledge handbook of world Englishes. Routledge. pp. 132–151. ISBN 978-0-415-62264-6. Lay summary (29 March 2015).  Campbell, Alistair (1959). Old English Grammar. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-811943-7.  Carr, Philip; Honeybone, Patrick (2007). "English phonology and linguistic theory: an introduction to issues, and to 'Issues in English Phonology'". Language Sciences. 29 (2): 117–153. doi:10.1016/j.langsci.2006.12.018. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Cassidy, Frederic G. (1982). "Geographical Variation of English in the United States". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 177–210. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Cercignani, Fausto (1981). Shakespeare's works and Elizabethan pronunciation. Clarendon Press. Retrieved 14 March 2015. Lay summary (15 March 2015).  Collingwood, Robin George; Myres, J. N. L. (1936). "Chapter XX. The Sources for the period: Angles, Saxons, and Jutes on the Continent". Roman Britain and the English Settlements. Book V: The English Settlements. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press. LCCN 37002621. Lay summary (15 March 2015).  Collins, Beverley; Mees, Inger M. (2003) [First published 1981]. The Phonetics of English and Dutch (PDF) (5th ed.). Leiden: Brill Publishers. ISBN 9004103406.  Connell, B. A. (2006). "Nigeria: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 88–90. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01655-2. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 25 March 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Conrad, Andrew W.; Rubal-Lopez, Alma (1 January 1996). Post-Imperial English: Status Change in Former British and American Colonies, 1940–1990. de Gruyter. p. 261. ISBN 978-3-11-087218-7. Retrieved 2 April 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Crystal, David (2002). Language Death. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139106856. ISBN 978-1-139-10685-6. Retrieved 25 February 2015.  Crystal, David (2003a). English as a Global Language (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 69. ISBN 978-0-521-53032-3. Retrieved 4 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) – Library of Congress (sample) (4 February 2015).  Crystal, David (2003b). The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-53033-4. Retrieved 4 February 2015. Lay summary (4 February 2015).  Crystal, David (2004). "Subcontinent Raises Its Voice". The Guardian. Retrieved 4 February 2015.  Crystal, David (2006). "Chapter 9: English worldwide". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 420–439. ISBN 978-0-511-16893-2.  Daniels, Peter T.; Bright, William, eds. (6 June 1996). The World's Writing Systems. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-507993-7. Retrieved 23 February 2015. Lay summary (23 February 2015).  Dehaene, Stanislas (2009). Reading in the Brain: The Science and Evolution of a Human Invention. Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-02110-9. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Lay summary (3 April 2015).  Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. (2006). "Overview". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 30–31. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Denning, Keith; Kessler, Brett; Leben, William Ronald (17 February 2007). English Vocabulary Elements. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-516803-7. Retrieved 25 February 2015. Lay summary (25 February 2015).  Department for Communities and Local Government (United Kingdom) (27 February 2007). Second Report submitted by the United Kingdom pursuant to article 25, paragraph 1 of the framework convention for the protection of national minorities (PDF) (Report). Council of Europe. ACFC/SR/II(2007)003 rev1. Retrieved 6 March 2015.  Deumert, A. (2006). "Migration and Language". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 129–133. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01294-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Dixon, R. M. W. (1982). "The grammar of English phrasal verbs". Australian Journal of Linguistics. 2 (1): 1–42. doi:10.1080/07268608208599280.  Donoghue, D. (2008). Old English Literature: A Short Introduction. Wiley. doi:10.1002/9780470776025. ISBN 978-0-631-23486-9. Retrieved 16 March 2015.  Durrell, M. (2006). "Germanic Languages". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 53–55. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/02189-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Eagleson, Robert D. (1982). "English in Australia and New Zealand". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 415–438. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  "Summary by language size". Ethnologue: Languages of the World. Retrieved 10 February 2015.  European Commission (June 2012). Special Eurobarometer 386: Europeans and Their Languages (PDF) (Report). Eurobarometer Special Surveys. Retrieved 12 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (27 March 2015).  Fasold, Ralph W.; Connor-Linton, Jeffrey, eds. (2014). An Introduction to Language and Linguistics (Second ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-316-06185-5.  Fischer, Olga; van der Wurff, Wim (2006). "Chapter 3: Syntax". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 109–198. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Giegerich, Heinz J. (1992). English Phonology: An Introduction. Cambridge Textbooks in Linguistics. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-33603-1.  Gneuss, Helmut (2013). "Chapter 2: The Old English Language". In Godden, Malcolm; Lapidge, Michael. The Cambridge companion to Old English literature (Second ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 19–49. ISBN 978-0-521-15402-4.  Görlach, Manfred (1991). Introduction to Early Modern English. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-32529-3.  Gordin, Michael D. (4 February 2015). "Absolute English". Aeon. Retrieved 16 February 2015.  Gordon, Elizabeth; Campbell, Lyle; Hay, Jennifer; Maclagan, Margaret; Sudbury, Angela; Trudgill, Peter (2004). New Zealand English: its origins and evolution. Studies in English Language. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-10895-9.  Gottlieb, H. (2006). "Linguistic Influence". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 196–206. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04455-2. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Graddol, David (2006). English Next: Why global English may mean the end of 'English as a Foreign Language' (PDF). The British Council. Retrieved 7 February 2015. Lay summary – ELT Journal (7 February 2015).  Graddol, David (2010). English Next India: The future of English in India (PDF). The British Council. ISBN 978-0-86355-627-2. Retrieved 7 February 2015. Lay summary – ELT Journal (7 February 2015).  Graddol, David; Leith, Dick; Swann, Joan; Rhys, Martin; Gillen, Julia, eds. (2007). Changing English. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-37679-2. Retrieved 11 February 2015.  Green, Lisa J. (2002). African American English: a linguistic introduction. Cambridge University Press.  Greenbaum, S.; Nelson, G. (1 January 2002). An introduction to English grammar (Second ed.). Longman. ISBN 978-0-582-43741-8.  Halliday, M. A. K.; Hasan, Ruqaiya (1976). Cohesion in English. Pearson Education ltd.  Hancock, Ian F.; Angogo, Rachel (1982). "English in East Africa". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 415–438. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Harbert, Wayne (2007). The Germanic Languages. Cambridge Language Surveys. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511755071. ISBN 978-0-521-01511-0. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Lay summary – Language (journal of the Linguistic Society of America) (26 February 2015).  Hickey, R. (2007). Irish English: History and present-day forms. Cambridge University Press.  Hickey, R., ed. (2005). Legacies of colonial English: Studies in transported dialects. Cambridge University Press.  Hogg, Richard M. (1992). "Chapter 3: Phonology and Morphology". In Hogg, Richard M. The Cambridge History of the English Language. 1: The Beginnings to 1066. Cambridge University Press. pp. 67–168. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521264747. ISBN 978-0-521-26474-7.  Hogg, Richard M. (2006). "Chapter7: English in Britain". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 360–61. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  "How English evolved into a global language". BBC. 20 December 2010. Retrieved 9 August 2015.  "How many words are there in the English language?". Oxford Dictionaries Online. Oxford University Press. 2015. Retrieved 2 April 2015. How many words are there in the English language? There is no single sensible answer to this question. It's impossible to count the number of words in a language, because it's so hard to decide what actually counts as a word.  Huddleston, Rodney; Pullum, Geoffrey K. (15 April 2002). The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-43146-0. Retrieved 10 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (10 February 2015).  Hughes, Arthur; Trudgill, Peter (1996). English Accents and Dialects (3rd ed.). Arnold Publishers.  International Civil Aviation Organization (2011). "Personnel Licensing FAQ". International Civil Aviation Organization – Air Navigation Bureau. In which languages does a licence holder need to demonstrate proficiency?. Retrieved 16 December 2014. Controllers working on stations serving designated airports and routes used by international air services shall demonstrate language proficiency in English as well as in any other language(s) used by the station on the ground.  International Maritime Organization (2011). "IMO Standard Marine Communication Phrases". Retrieved 16 December 2014.  International Phonetic Association (1999). Handbook of the International Phonetic Association: A guide to the use of the International Phonetic Alphabet. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-65236-7.  Jambor, Paul Z. (December 2007). "English Language Imperialism: Points of View". Journal of English as an International Language. 2: 103–123.  Jespersen, Otto (2007) [1924]. "Case: The number of English cases". The Philosophy of Grammar. Routledge.  Kachru, B. (2006). "English: World Englishes". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 195–202. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00645-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Kastovsky, Dieter (2006). "Chapter 4: Vocabulary". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 199–270. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  König, Ekkehard; van der Auwera, Johan, eds. (1994). The Germanic Languages. Routledge Language Family Descriptions. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-28079-2. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Lay summary (26 February 2015).  The survey of the Germanic branch languages includes chapters by Winfred P. Lehmann, Ans van Kemenade, John Ole Askedal, Erik Andersson, Neil Jacobs, Silke Van Ness, and Suzanne Romaine. König, Ekkehard (1994). "17. English". In König, Ekkehard; van der Auwera, Johan. The Germanic Languages. Routledge Language Family Descriptions. Routledge. pp. 532–562. ISBN 978-0-415-28079-2. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Lay summary (26 February 2015).  Labov, W. (1972). "13. The Social Stratification of (R) in New York City Department Stores". Sociolinguistic patterns. University of Pennsylvania Press.  Labov, W. (2012). "1. About Language and Language Change". Dialect Diversity in America: The Politics of Language Change. University of Virginia Press.  Labov, William; Ash, Sharon; Boberg, Charles (2006). The Atlas of North American English. Berlin: de Gruyter. ISBN 3-11-016746-8. Retrieved 2 April 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Lanham, L. W. (1982). "English in South Africa". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 324–352. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Lass, Roger (1992). "2. Phonology and Morphology". In Blake, Norman. Cambridge History of the English Language. II: 1066–1476. Cambridge University Press. pp. 103–123.  Lass, Roger (2000). "Chapter 3: Phonology and Morphology". In Lass, Roger. The Cambridge History of the English Language, Volume III: 1476–1776. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 56–186.  Lass, Roger (2002), "South African English", in Mesthrie, Rajend, Language in South Africa, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-79105-2  Lass, Roger (2006). "Chapter 2: Phonology and Morphology". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 46–47. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Lawler, J. (2006). "Punctuation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 290–291. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04573-9. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Lawton, David L. (1982). "English in the Caribbean". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 251–280. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Leech, G. N. (2006). A glossary of English grammar. Edinburgh University Press.  Leech, Geoffrey; Hundt, Marianne; Mair, Christian; Smith, Nicholas (22 October 2009). Change in contemporary English: a grammatical study (PDF). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86722-1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 22 September 2016. Lay summary (PDF) (29 March 2015).  Levine, L.; Crockett, H. J. (1966). "Speech Variation in a Piedmont Community: Postvocalic r*". Sociological Inquiry. 36 (2): 204–226. doi:10.1111/j.1475-682x.1966.tb00625.x.  Li, David C. S. (2003). "Between English and Esperanto: what does it take to be a world language?". International Journal of the Sociology of Language. 2003 (164): 33–63. doi:10.1515/ijsl.2003.055. ISSN 0165-2516. Retrieved 27 March 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Lim, L.; Ansaldo, U. (2006). "Singapore: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of Language & Linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 387–389. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01701-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Maclagan, Margaret (2010). "Chapter 8: The English(es) of New Zealand". In Kirkpatrick, Andy. The Routledge handbook of world Englishes. Routledge. pp. 151–164. ISBN 978-0-203-84932-3. Lay summary (29 March 2015).  MacMahon, M. K. (2006). "16. English Phonetics". In Bas Aarts; April McMahon. The Handbook of English Linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 359–382.  "Macquarie Dictionary". Australia's National Dictionary & Thesaurus Online | Macquarie Dictionary. Macmillan Publishers Group Australia. 2015. Retrieved 15 February 2015. (registration required (help)).  Mair, C.; Leech, G. (2006). "14 Current Changes in English Syntax". The handbook of English linguistics.  Mair, Christian (2006). Twentieth-century English: History, variation and standardization. Cambridge University Press.  Mazrui, Ali A.; Mazrui, Alamin (3 August 1998). The Power of Babel: Language and Governance in the African Experience. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-51429-1. Retrieved 15 February 2015. Lay summary (15 February 2015).  McArthur, Tom, ed. (1992). The Oxford Companion to the English Language. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-214183-5. Lay summary (15 February 2015).  McCrum, Robert; MacNeil, Robert; Cran, William (2003). The Story of English (Third Revised ed.). London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-200231-5.  McGuinness, Diane (1997). Why Our Children Can't Read, and what We Can Do about it: A Scientific Revolution in Reading. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-83161-9. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Lay summary (3 April 2015).  Meierkord, C. (2006). "Lingua Francas as Second Languages". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 163–171. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00641-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) "English". Merriam-webster.com. 26 February 2015. Retrieved 26 February 2015.  Mesthrie, Rajend (2010). "New Englishes and the native speaker debate". Language Sciences. 32: 594–601. doi:10.1016/j.langsci.2010.08.002. ISSN 0388-0001. Retrieved 17 February 2015.  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Miller, Jim (2002). An Introduction to English Syntax. Edinburgh University Press.  Montgomery, M. (1993). "The Southern Accent—Alive and Well". Southern Cultures. 1 (1): 47–64.  Mountford, J. (2006). "English Spelling: Rationale". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 156–159. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05018-5. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Mufwene, S. S. (2006). "Language Spread". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 613–616. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01291-8. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Nation, I. S. P. (15 March 2001). Learning Vocabulary in Another Language. Cambridge University Press. p. 477. ISBN 0-521-80498-1. Retrieved 4 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (4 February 2015).  National Records of Scotland (26 September 2013). "Census 2011: Release 2A". Scotland's Census 2011. Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Neijt, A. (2006). "Spelling Reform". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 68–71. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04574-0. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Nevalainen, Terttu; Tieken-Boon van Ostade, Ingrid (2006). "Chapter 5: Standardization". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency (11 December 2012). "Census 2011: Key Statistics for Northern Ireland December 2012" (PDF). Statistics Bulletin. Table KS207NI: Main Language. Retrieved 16 December 2014.  Northrup, David (20 March 2013). How English Became the Global Language. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-137-30306-6. Retrieved 25 March 2015. Lay summary (25 March 2015).  O'Dwyer, Bernard (2006). Modern English Structures, second edition: Form, Function, and Position. Broadview Press.  Office for National Statistics (4 March 2013). "Language in England and Wales, 2011". 2011 Census Analysis. Retrieved 16 December 2014.  "Oxford Learner's Dictionaries". Oxford. Retrieved 25 February 2015.  Patrick, P. L. (2006a). "Jamaica: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 88–90. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01760-0. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Patrick, P. L. (2006b). "English, African-American Vernacular". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 159–163. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05092-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Payne, John; Huddleston, Rodney (2002). "5. Nouns and noun phrases". In Huddleston, R.; Pullum, G. K. The Cambridge Grammar of English. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 323–522.  Phillipson, Robert (28 April 2004). English-Only Europe?: Challenging Language Policy. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-44349-9. Retrieved 15 February 2015.  Richter, Ingo (1 January 2012). "Introduction". In Richter, Dagmar; Richter, Ingo; Toivanen, Reeta; et al. Language Rights Revisited: The challenge of global migration and communication. BWV Verlag. ISBN 978-3-8305-2809-8. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  Roach, Peter (1991). English Phonetics and Phonology (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.  Roach, Peter (2009). English Phonetics and Phonology (4th ed.). Cambridge.  Robinson, Orrin (1992). Old English and Its Closest Relatives: A Survey of the Earliest Germanic Languages. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-2221-6. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Romaine, Suzanne (1982). "English in Scotland". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 56–83. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Romaine, Suzanne (1999). "Chapter 1: Introduction". In Romaine, Suzanne. Cambridge History of the English Language. IV: 1776–1997. Cambridge University Press. pp. 1–56. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521264778.002. ISBN 978-0-521-26477-8.  Romaine, S. (2006). "Language Policy in Multilingual Educational Contexts". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 584–596. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00646-5. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) "The Routes of English". 1 August 2015.  Rowicka, G. J. (2006). "Canada: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 194–195. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01848-4. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Rubino, C. (2006). "Philippines: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 323–326. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01736-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Ryan, Camille (August 2013). "Language Use in the United States: 2011" (PDF). American Community Survey Reports. p. 1. Retrieved 16 December 2014.  Sailaja, Pingali (2009). Indian English. Dialects of English. Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 978-0-7486-2595-6. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Schiffrin, Deborah (1988). Discourse Markers. Studies in Interactional Sociolinguistics. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-35718-0. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Schneider, Edgar (2007). Postcolonial English: Varieties Around the World. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-53901-2. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Schönweitz, Thomas (2001). "Gender and Postvocalic /r/ in the American South: A Detailed Socioregional Analysis". American Speech. 76 (3): 259–285. doi:10.1215/00031283-76-3-259.  Shaywitz, Sally E. (2003). Overcoming Dyslexia: A New and Complete Science-based Program for Reading Problems at Any Level. A.A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-375-40012-4. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Lay summary (3 April 2015).  Sheidlower, Jesse (10 April 2006). "How many words are there in English?". Retrieved 2 April 2015. The problem with trying to number the words in any language is that it's very hard to agree on the basics. For example, what is a word?  Smith, Jeremy J. (2 April 2009). Old English: a linguistic introduction. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86677-4.  Statistics Canada (22 August 2014). "Population by mother tongue and age groups (total), 2011 counts, for Canada, provinces and territories". Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Statistics New Zealand (April 2014). "2013 QuickStats About Culture and Identity" (PDF). p. 23. Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Lehohla, Pali, ed. (2012). "Population by first language spoken and province" (PDF). Census 2011: Census in Brief (PDF). Pretoria: Statistics South Africa. p. 23. ISBN 978-0-621-41388-5. Report No. 03?01?41. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 November 2015.  Svartvik, Jan; Leech, Geoffrey (12 December 2006). English – One Tongue, Many Voices. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-4039-1830-7. Retrieved 5 March 2015. Lay summary (16 March 2015).  Swan, M. (2006). "English in the Present Day (Since ca. 1900)". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 149–156. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05058-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Sweet, Henry (2014) [1892]. A New English Grammar. Cambridge University Press.  Thomas, Erik R. (2008). "Rural Southern white accents". In Edgar W. Schneider. Varieties of English. 2: The Americas and the Caribbean. de Gruyter. pp. 87–114. Retrieved 2 April 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Thomason, Sarah G.; Kaufman, Terrence (1988). Language Contact, Creolization and Genetic Linguistics. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-91279-3.  Todd, Loreto (1982). "The English language in West Africa". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 281–305. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Toon, Thomas E. (1982). "Variation in Contemporary American English". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 210–250. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Toon, Thomas E. (1992). "Old English Dialects". In Hogg, Richard M. The Cambridge History of the English Language. 1: The Beginnings to 1066. Cambridge University Press. pp. 409–451. ISBN 978-0-521-26474-7.  Trask, Larry; Trask, Robert Lawrence (January 2010). Why Do Languages Change?. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83802-3. Retrieved 5 March 2015.  Trudgill, Peter (2000). The Dialects of England (2nd ed.). Oxford: Blackwell. ISBN 978-0-631-21815-9. Lay summary (27 March 2015).  Trudgill, P. (2006). "Accent". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. p. 14. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01506-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Trudgill, Peter; Hannah, Jean (2002). International English: A Guide to the Varieties of Standard English (4th ed.). London: Hodder Education. ISBN 0-340-80834-9.  Trudgill, Peter; Hannah, Jean (1 January 2008). International English: A Guide to the Varieties of Standard English (5th ed.). London: Arnold. ISBN 978-0-340-97161-1. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 26 March 2015. Lay summary (26 March 2015).  United Nations (2008). "Everything You Always Wanted to Know About the United Nations" (PDF). Retrieved 4 April 2015. The working languages at the UN Secretariat are English and French.  Wardhaugh, Ronald (2010). An Introduction to Sociolinguistics. Blackwell textbooks in Linguistics; 4 (Sixth ed.). Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4051-8668-1.  Watts, Richard J. (3 March 2011). Language Myths and the History of English. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195327601.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-532760-1. Retrieved 10 March 2015. Lay summary (10 March 2015).  Wells, J.C. (1982). Accents of English, I, II, III. Cambridge University Press.  Wojcik, R. H. (2006). "Controlled Languages". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 139–142. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05081-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Wolfram, W. (2006). "Variation and Language: Overview". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of Language & Linguistics. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 333–341. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04256-5. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) External links Find more aboutEnglish languageat Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Textbooks from Wikibooks Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Accents of English from Around the World (University of Edinburgh) Sound files comparing how 110 words are pronounced in 50 English accents from around the world Articles related to the English language Linguistics v t e Description of the English language Grammar Phonology Stress and reduced vowels Orthography Alphabet Braille Dialects Language history Phonological history v t e History of English Proto-Indo-European Proto-Germanic Proto-West-Germanic Anglo-Frisian languages Old English Anglo-Norman language Middle English Early Modern English Modern English Phonological history General Old English Vowels Great Vowel Shift low unrounded vowels low back vowels high back vowels high front vowels diphthongs changes before historic /l/ changes before historic /r/ trisyllabic laxing Northern Cities Vowel Shift Consonants rhoticity flapping t-glottalization l-vocalization consonant clusters h-dropping wh th th-fronting ð (eth) þ (thorn) th-stopping v t e Dialects and accents of Modern English by continent Europe United Kingdom England   Varieties by common name Barrovian Black Country Brummie Bristolian Cheshire Cockney "Mockney" Cornish Cumbrian East Anglian East Midlands Essex Estuary Geordie Kentish Lancastrian Mackem Mancunian Multicultural London Norfolk Northern Pitmatic Potteries Received Pronunciation Scouse Southern Suffolk Sussex West Country "Mummerset" West Midlands Yorkshire   Varieties by geographic location East of England Essex Norfolk Suffolk East Midlands North Cheshire Cumbria [Barrow] Lancashire Manchester Merseyside Sunderland Tyneside Yorkshire South Kent Thames Estuary; London [Multicultural London] Sussex West Country Bristol Cornwall Dorset West Midlands Black Country Birmingham Stoke-on-Trent Northern Ireland Mid Ulster Ulster Scots Scotland Glasgow Highlands Lowlands Wales Cardiff Gower Ireland Dublin D4 South-West Cork Supraregional Ulster Channel Islands Alderney Guernsey Jersey Elsewhere Gibraltar Isle of Man Malta North and South America United States   Varieties by common name African American Appalachian Boston Cajun California Chicago; Detroit; Great Lakes Chicano Mid-Atlantic Philadelphia; South Jersey Baltimorese General American High Tider Maine Miami Midland Midwestern New England New Mexican New York Northeast Pennsylvania Old Southern Ozark Pacific Northwest Pennsylvania Dutch Pittsburghese Rhode Island Southern Texan Upper Midwestern Western Vermont Yat Yeshivish Yooper   Varieties by geographic location Delaware Valley; Mid-Atlantic Pennsylvania Dutch Philadelphia; South Jersey Baltimore Midland Midwest Great Lakes; Inland North Upper Midwest Upper Peninsula of Michigan New England Boston Maine Rhode Island Vermont New York City; North Jersey New York Latino North Northeast Pennsylvania South Acadiana Appalachia Chesapeake; Pamlico Miami New Orleans Ozarks Texas West California New Mexico Pacific Northwest Western Pennsylvania Canada Aboriginal Atlantic Cape Breton Newfoundland Lunenburg Standard Ottawa Valley Pacific Northwest Quebec Caribbean Bahamas Barbados Dominican Republic Jamaica Puerto Rico Trinidad Elsewhere Bermuda Falkland Islands Guyana Oceania Australia Aboriginal Broad; Strine General South Australian Torres Strait West Australian Elsewhere Fiji New Zealand Palau Solomon Islands Other continents Africa Cameroon Ghana Kenya Liberia Malawi Namibia Nigeria Sierra Leone South Africa Afrikaans Black Cape Flats Indian White Uganda Asia Bangladesh Brunei Burma or Myanmar Hong Kong India Malaysia Nepal Pakistan Philippines Singapore Sri Lanka v t e Modern Germanic languages and dialects North Germanic West Scandinavian Bergensk Elfdalian Faroese Gøtudanskt Icelandic Jamtlandic Norwegian Bokmål Nynorsk Sognamål Trøndersk Valdris Vestlandsk Vikværsk East Scandinavian Bornholmsk Dalecarlian Danish Insular Danish Jutlandic South Perkerdansk Gutnish Kalix Kebabnorsk Kiruna Luleå Norrland Småländska South Swedish Scanian Stockholm Rinkeby Uppländska Västgötska Westrobothnian Swedish Åland Estonia Finland Ostrobothnia West Germanic Anglo- Frisian English English dialects North Frisian Saterland Frisian Scots West Frisian Low Franconian Dutch Hollandic West Flemish Zeelandic East Flemish Brabantian Limburgish Meuse-Rhenish Afrikaans Low German/ Low Saxon Dutch Low Saxon Northern Low Saxon Westphalian Eastphalian Mecklenburgisch-Vorpommersch Brandenburgisch East Pomeranian Central Pomeranian Low Prussian High German Standard German German Swiss Austrian Central German Ripuarian Moselle Franconian Luxembourgish Lorraine Franconian Rhine Franconian Hessian Thuringian Upper Saxon High Prussian Lausitzisch-neumärkisch Silesian Upper German East Franconian South Franconian Northern Bavarian Central Bavarian Southern Bavarian Swabian Low Alemannic Central Alemannic High Alemannic Highest Alemannic Swiss German Yiddish v t e Dictionaries of English Old and Middle English An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary Dictionary of Old English Middle English Dictionary Historic Catholicon Anglicum (1483) The English Schoole-Master (1596) The New World of English Words (1658) A New English Dictionary (1702) An Universal Etymological English Dictionary (1721) A Dictionary of the English Language (1755) Webster's Dictionary (1828) Worcester's Dictionary Richardson's New Dictionary Imperial Dictionary (1847–50) Century Dictionary (1889–91) American English American Heritage Dictionary of American English Dictionary of American Regional English Encarta New Oxford American Oxford American Random House Webster's Webster's New World Webster's Third New International Dictionary World Book Dictionary British English Chambers Collins Oxford English Concise Oxford English Compact Oxford English Shorter Oxford English Historical Thesaurus Oxford Dictionary of English Penguin Canadian English Canadian Oxford Dictionary of Canadianisms Gage Canadian (Full list) Australian English Australian National Australian Oxford Macquarie Online Wiktionary Collaborative International Dictionary of English OmegaWiki Urban Dictionary Wordnik Learners / ESL Cambridge Advanced Learner's Collins COBUILD Advanced Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners Merriam-Webster's Advanced Learner's Oxford Advanced Learner's Geopolitical use v t e English-speaking world Click on a coloured area to see an article about English in that country or region Further links Articles English-speaking world History of the English language British Empire English in the Commonwealth of Nations Lists List of countries by English-speaking population List of countries where English is an official language   Countries and territories where English is the national language or the native language of the majority Africa Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Americas Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda The Bahamas Barbados Belize Bermuda British Virgin Islands Canada Cayman Islands Dominica Falkland Islands Grenada Guyana Jamaica Montserrat Saba Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Trinidad and Tobago Turks and Caicos Islands United States United States Virgin Islands Europe Guernsey Ireland Isle of Man Jersey United Kingdom Oceania Australia New Zealand Norfolk Island Pitcairn Islands   Countries and territories where English is an official language, but not the majority first language Africa Botswana Cameroon The Gambia Ghana Kenya Lesotho Liberia Malawi Mauritius Namibia Nigeria Rwanda Sierra Leone Somaliland South Africa South Sudan Sudan Swaziland Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Americas Puerto Rico Asia Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Special Administrative Region India Pakistan Philippines Singapore Europe Gibraltar Malta Oceania American Samoa Cook Islands Fiji Guam Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru Niue Northern Mariana Islands Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tokelau Tuvalu Vanuatu Dependencies shown in italics. Authority control GND: 4014777-0 SUDOC: 027219232 NDL: 00561788 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=English_language&oldid=777197756" Categories: Analytic languages English language English languages Fusional languages Germanic languages Languages of American Samoa Languages of Antigua and Barbuda Languages of Australia Languages of Belize Languages of Bermuda Languages of Botswana Languages of Cameroon Languages of Canada Languages of Fiji Languages of Ghana Languages of Grenada Languages of Guam Languages of Guyana Languages of Hong Kong Languages of India Languages of Ireland Languages of Jamaica Languages of Kenya Languages of Kiribati Languages of Lesotho Languages of Liberia Languages of Malawi Languages of Malaysia Languages of Malta Languages of Mauritius Languages of Namibia Languages of Nauru Languages of New Zealand Languages of Nigeria Languages of Niue Languages of Pakistan Languages of Palau Languages of Papua New Guinea Languages of Rwanda Languages of Saint Kitts and Nevis Languages of Saint Lucia Languages of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Languages of Samoa Languages of Seychelles Languages of Sierra Leone Languages of Singapore Languages of South Africa Languages of South Sudan Languages of Sudan Languages of Swaziland Languages of the Bahamas Languages of the British Virgin Islands Languages of the Cayman Islands Languages of the Marshall Islands Languages of the Philippines Languages of the Pitcairn Islands Languages of the Solomon Islands Languages of the United Kingdom Languages of the United States Virgin Islands Languages of the United States Languages of Tokelau Languages of Trinidad and Tobago Languages of Uganda Languages of Vanuatu Languages of Zambia Languages of Zimbabwe Stress-timed languages Subject–verb–object languages Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Good articles Use dmy dates from February 2016 EngvarB from July 2014 Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code ISO language articles citing sources other than Ethnologue Articles including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Old English-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016 Articles with hAudio microformats Pages containing links to subscription-or-libraries content Pages containing links to subscription-only content Pages with login required references or sources Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiquote Languages Acèh ???????? ???????? Afrikaans Akan Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés ????? Armãneashti Arpetan ??????? Asturianu Avañe'? ???? Aymar aru Az?rbaycanca ?????? Bamanankan ????? Bahasa Banjar Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ??????? Bikol Central ????????? Boarisch ??????? Bosanski Brezhoneg ?????? Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski Eesti ???????? Emiliàn e rumagnòl ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara E?egbe ????? Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ?? ????? ??????? ?????? ?????? ?????? / Gõychi Konknni ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hawai?i ??????? ?????? Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue ??????/inuktitut ???? IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kalaallisut ????? Kapampangan ????????-??????? ??????? ????? / ????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Kinyarwanda Kiswahili ???? Kongo Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî ???????? ????? ???? Ladino ????? ????? ??? ???? ?????? Latga?u Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Ligure Limburgs Lingála La .lojban. Lumbaart Magyar ?????? ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ????????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-d??ng-ng?? Mirandés ??????? ?????? ?????????? N?huatl Dorerin Naoero Nederlands Nedersaksies N?hiyaw?win / ??????? ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norfuk / Pitkern Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? Pälzisch Pangasinan ?????? Papiamentu ???? Patois ????? ???? ????????? Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Q?r?mtatarca Reo tahiti Ripoarisch Român? Rumantsch Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sámegiella Gagana Samoa ????????? Sängö Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sesotho Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana Shqip Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? SiSwati Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????????? / ?????????? ?l?nski Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Sranantongo ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Taqbaylit Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ?????? ??? ?????? ??? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe Twi ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? ???? ???????? / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Võro Walon ?? West-Vlams Winaray Wolof ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zazaki Zeêuws Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 25 April 2017, at 19:48. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Arts |||Portal:Arts From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Shortcuts: P:A P:ARTS Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Sociology portals: Arts · Anthropology · Community · Culture · Economics · Education · Geography · Gender studies · Globalization · History · Human rights · Internet · Law · Philosophy · Social movements · Social sciences · Social welfare and social work · Society edit   The Arts Portal Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts The arts is a vast subdivision of culture, composed of many creative endeavors and disciplines. It is a broader term than "art", which, as a description of a field, usually means only the visual arts. The arts encompass the visual arts, the literary arts and the performing arts – music, theatre, dance and film, among others. This list is by no means comprehensive, but only meant to introduce the concept of the arts. For all intents and purposes, the history of the arts begins with the history of art. The arts might have origins in early human evolutionary prehistory. Ancient Greek art saw the veneration of the animal form and the development of equivalent skills to show musculature, poise, beauty and anatomically correct proportions. Ancient Roman art depicted gods as idealized humans, shown with characteristic distinguishing features (e.g. Jupiter's thunderbolt). In Byzantine and Gothic art of the Middle Ages, the dominance of the church insisted on the expression of biblical and not material truths. Eastern art has generally worked in a style akin to Western medieval art, namely a concentration on surface patterning and local colour (meaning the plain colour of an object, such as basic red for a red robe, rather than the modulations of that colour brought about by light, shade and reflection). A characteristic of this style is that the local colour is often defined by an outline (a contemporary equivalent is the cartoon). This is evident in, for example, the art of India, Tibet and Japan. Religious Islamic art forbids iconography, and expresses religious ideas through geometry instead. The physical and rational certainties depicted by the 19th-century Enlightenment were shattered not only by new discoveries of relativity by Einstein and of unseen psychology by Freud, but also by unprecedented technological development. Paradoxically the expressions of new technologies were greatly influenced by the ancient tribal arts of Africa and Oceania, through the works of Paul Gauguin and the Post-Impressionists, Pablo Picasso and the Cubists, as well as the Futurists and others. More about The arts... View new selections below (purge) edit   Featured article Louis Lambert is a French novel by Honoré de Balzac (1799–1850), included in the Études philosophiques section of his novel sequence La Comédie humaine. Set mostly in a school at Vendôme, it examines the life and theories of a boy genius fascinated by the Swedish philosopher Emanuel Swedenborg (1688–1772). Balzac wrote Louis Lambert during the summer of 1832 while he was staying with friends at the Château de Saché. The novel contains a minimal plot, focusing mostly on the metaphysical ideas of its boy-genius protagonist and his only friend (eventually revealed to be Balzac himself). Although it is not a significant example of the realist style for which Balzac became famous, the novel provides insight into the author's own childhood. Specific details and events from the author's life – including punishment from teachers and social ostracism – suggest a fictionalized autobiography. Critics panned the novel, but Balzac believed that it provided an important look at philosophy, especially metaphysics. As he developed the scheme for La Comédie humaine, he placed Louis Lambert in the Études philosophiques section, and later returned to the same themes in his novel Séraphîta, about an androgynous angelic creature. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured picture Credit: Muhammad Mahdi Karim The glass house at Lal Bagh, a botanical garden in Bangalore, India. The garden was commissioned by the ruler of Mysore, Hyder Ali in 1760, and completed during the reign of his son Tipu Sultan. The glass house was modeled on London's Crystal Palace and constructed at the end of the 19th century. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Did you know... ... that The Fairman Rogers Four-in-Hand (pictured) was the first painting to demonstrate, based on systematic photographic analysis, how horses move? ... that Cheyenne artist Bently Spang satirized anthropologists' depictions of Native Americans as a "lost culture" with a museum exhibit showcasing ordinary objects? ... that Bagyi Aung Soe, now recognized as one of Burma's most important modern artists, lived in poverty and was considered by some to be mad? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   In this month 9 April 2000 – Jackie Evancho is born. At the age of 10, she becomes the youngest singer in history with a platinum album, O Holy Night. 10 April 1900 – Scottish soprano Mary Garden makes her professional debut singing the title role in Gustave Charpentier's Louise at the Opéra-Comique in Paris 11 April 1869 – Norwegian sculptor Gustav Vigeland, designer of the Nobel Peace Prize medal, is born near Halse og Harkmark 12 April 1937 – Abdülhak Hâmid Tarhan, an early 20th-century Turkish playwright and poet who was one of the leading lights of the Turkish Romantic period dies in Istanbul 23 April 1616 – William Shakespeare (pictured), often considered the greatest English playwright, dies in Stratford-upon-Avon at the age of 52 29 April 1968 – Hair, which defined the genre of the "rock musical", has its Broadway premiere at the Biltmore Theatre More anniversaries... edit   News April 5: Wikinews visits set of indie film 'Dead on Set' April 3: Pop-artist James Rosenquist dies aged 83 March 27: Fans unite at Toronto Comicon, meet Degrassi stars March 1: Politically concerned movie Zootopia wins Academy Award for Best Animated Feature Film February 15: Adele and David Bowie each win five Grammys Arts on Wikinews edit   Featured biography André Kertész (1894–1985) was a Hungarian-born photographer distinguished by his photographic composition and by his early efforts in developing the photo essay. In the early years of his lengthy career, his then-unorthodox camera angles, and his unwillingness to compromise his personal photographic style, prevented his work from gaining wider recognition. Even towards the end of his life, Kertész did not feel he had gained worldwide recognition. The first photographer to have an exposition devoted to his work, he is recognized as one of the seminal figures of photojournalism, if not photography as a whole. Dedicated by his family to work as a stock broker, Kertész was an autodidact and his early work was mostly published in magazines. The imminent threat of WWII pushed him to immigrate to the United States, where he had a more difficult life and needed to rebuild his reputation through commissioned work. He would take offense with several editors that he felt did not recognize his work. In the 1940s and '50s he stopped working for magazines and began to achieve greater international success. Despite the numerous awards he collected over the years, he still felt unrecognized, a sentiment which did not change even at the time of his death. His career is generally divided into four periods – the Hungarian period, the French period, the American period and, towards the end of his life, the International period. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured audio 1788 – Auld Lang Syne Frank C. Stanley's 1910 performance of Robert Burns' Auld Lang Syne. Contains the first and last verse. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories ? Arts ? Arts portal ? Arts by culture ? Arts by place ? Arts-related lists ? Aesthetics ? Arts genres by country or nationality ? Arts awards ? Censorship in the arts ? Crafts ? Creative works ? Arts districts ? Arts events ? Literature ? Arts occupations ? Arts organizations ? Arts portals ? Performing arts ? Religion and the arts ? Arts venues ? Visual arts ? Women and the arts ? Works about the arts ? Wikipedia books on arts ? Art stubs edit   WikiProjects Parent project Arts Descendant projects Aesthetics Architecture Books Novels Collections care Dance Films Horror Literature Magic Music Albums Classical music Composers Guitar Musicians Music Venues Opera Gilbert and Sullivan Richard Wagner Poetry Television Theatre Elizabethan theatre Musical theatre Visual arts Animation Anime and manga Contemporary art Comics Graffiti Graphic design Fashion Photography Public art What are WikiProjects? edit   Selected quote “ It [the movie art form] combines so many other art forms, as do theater and opera, but the essence of cinema is editing. It's the combination of what can be extraordinary images, images of people during emotional moments, or just images in a general sense, but put together in a kind of alchemy. A number of images put together a certain way become something quite above and beyond what any of them are individually. ” — Francis Ford Coppola ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Related portals Architecture Culture Dance Film Literature Music Philosophy Poetry Television Theatre Video games Visual arts Writing edit   Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Requests articles (arts and entertainment) Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Arts Expand: check Art stubs to expand Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Arts topics, requested pictures edit   Associated Wikimedia Arts on Wikibooks  Arts on Wikimedia Commons Arts on Wikinews  Arts on Wikiquote  Arts on Wikisource  Arts on Wikiversity  Arts on Wiktionary  Manuals and books Images and media News Quotations Texts Learning resources Definitions What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Arts&oldid=649230671" Categories: Arts portal Arts Visual arts Performing arts Arts portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Català ?eština Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español ????? Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kapampangan ??????? Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Malagasy ?????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? Nederlands ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ???? ????? ?????? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? ????? ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Svenska Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ?????? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? West-Vlams ?? Xitsonga ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 28 February 2015, at 14:19. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography |||Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology edit   The Biography Portal Cultural icon A biography is a detailed description or account of someone's life. More than a list of basic facts (education, work, relationships, and death), a biography also portrays a subject's experience of these events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of his or her life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of a subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Biographical works in diverse media—from literature to film—form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and, at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is about a life of a subject, written by that subject or sometimes with a collaborator. More about biographies… View new selections below (purge) edit   Featured biography Ahmose I (sometimes written Amosis I and meaning The Moon is Born) was a pharaoh of ancient Egypt and the founder of the Eighteenth dynasty. He was a member of the Theban royal house, the son of pharaoh Tao II Seqenenre and brother of the last pharaoh of the Seventeenth dynasty, King Kamose. Sometime during the reign of his father or grandfather, Thebes rebelled against the Hyksos, the rulers of Lower Egypt. When he was seven his father was killed, and when he was about ten his brother died of unknown causes, after reigning only three years. Ahmose I assumed the throne after the death of his brother, and upon coronation became known as Neb-Pehty-Re (The Lord of Strength is Re). During his reign he completed the conquest and expulsion of the Hyksos from the delta region, restored Theban rule over the whole of Egypt and successfully reasserted Egyptian power in its formerly subject territories of Nubia and Canaan. He then reorganized the administration of the country, reopened quarries, mines and trade routes and began massive construction projects of a type that had not been undertaken since the time of the Middle Kingdom. This building program culminated in the construction of the last pyramid built by native Egyptian rulers. Ahmose's reign laid the foundations for the New Kingdom, under which Egyptian power reached its peak. His reign is usually dated to about 1550–1525 BC. (Read more...) Archive – More "Featured biographies"... edit   Selected portrait Credit: Bain News Service, restored by jjron Lillian Diana Gish (October 14, 1893 – February 27, 1993) was an American stage, screen, and television actress, director and writer whose film acting career spanned 75 years, from 1912 to 1987. She was a prominent film star of the 1910s and 1920s, particularly associated with the films of director D. W. Griffith, including her leading role in Griffith's seminal Birth of a Nation. More selected pictures... Read more... edit   Things you can do Write an article Expand an article about: a person an actor an animator an artist a businessperson a diplomat an educator an engineer a jurist a military person a musician a politician a scientist a sportsperson a writer a photographer Improve an article by: adding references Review an article John Gilchrist (linguist) • Thomas Brattle • Answer requests for comments Assess an article Assessment requests Unassessed articles edit   Categories Biography • People By association • By behavior • By ethnicity • By gender • By language • By nationality By occupation: Academics • Scientists Actors • Artists • Choreographers • Comedians • Dancers • Directors • Musicians • Photographers • Playwrights • Writers Astronauts • Aviators • Explorers • Mountain climbers Businesspeople • Computer designers • Innovators Heads of state • Humanitarians • Journalists • Lawyers • Politicians • Warriors Sportspeople • Association football players • Baseball players • Basketball players • Olympians By place • By political orientation • By religion By status: Award winners • Billionaires • Celebrities By time • Lists of people ? Biography (genre) ? Biography awards ? Biographers ? Family history ? Biography journals ? Biographical museums ? Oral history ? Person databases ? The Biography Channel shows ? Biographical works edit   On this day – April 26 Births 121 - Marcus Aurelius, Roman Emperor (d. 180) 1711 - David Hume, Scottish philosopher and historian (d. 1776) (pictured) 1785 - John James Audubon, French-American naturalist and illustrator (d. 1851) 1917 - I.M. Pei, Chinese-born architect 1933 - Carol Burnett, American comedian Deaths 1865 - John Wilkes Booth, American actor and assassin (shot) (b. 1838) 1970 - Gypsy Rose Lee, American actress (b. 1911) 1989 - Lucille Ball, American actress and comedian (b. 1911) More of today's anniversaries... edit   Did you know ... that Madmen in the Yard, a drawing by the Croatian painter Ignjat Job (pictured), was influenced by his two-year stay in a mental hospital? ... that USMC Lieutenant General Henry Louis Larsen was Governor of American Samoa and Governor of Guam after his father-in-law and brother-in-law were each Governor of Colorado? ... that detailed drawings by French explorer Louis Delaporte guided the reconstruction of Pha That Luang, a major Buddhist temple in Laos? ... that although Norma Lyon studied animal science at Iowa State University, she ended up sculpting butter at state fairs? ... that Tom Paton, a member of the Montreal hockey club, was the first goaltender to win the Stanley Cup in 1893? ... that after the Ottoman general Turahano?lu Ömer Bey wiped out one of Dracula's armies in 1462, he deposited 2,000 severed heads at the feet of Sultan Mehmed II? ... that the hasty marriage of Thomas Thynne of Longleat may have helped to inspire Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet? Read more... edit   Quote of the week "There is no Death! What seems so is transition; This life of mortal breath Is but a suburb of the life elysian, Whose portal we call Death." — Henry Wadsworth Longfellow In Resignation, 1849 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit   WikiProjects List of WikiProjects and work groups that involve biography articles: Arts and entertainment Actors and Filmmakers Composers Canadian Dictionary of Biography Initiative Living persons Philosophers Saints Romance authors Military Peers and Baronets Politics and government U.S. Members of Congress U.S. presidents Royalty and nobility Science and academia Aerospace Sports and games Baseball players List of all WikiProjects See also: Biographies of living persons • Manual of Style (biographies) edit   Related portals Anthropology Community Criminal justice Culture Death Gangs Human rights LGBT Mind and brain Music Philosophy Religion Sexuality Social and political philosophy Thinking edit   Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Wikispecies  Species Wikipedia's Portals All Portals Overview Glossaries Indices Lists Outlines Categories Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Featured portals About portals Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=771163531" Categories: Depreciated Portal:Biography pages Biography portal Biography portals Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ?????? ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 19 March 2017, at 22:49. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Geography |||Portal:Geography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Sociology portals: Arts · Anthropology · Community · Culture · Economics · Education · Geography · Gender studies · Globalization · History · Human rights · Internet · Law · Philosophy · Social movements · Social sciences · Social welfare and social work · Society Places near you edit   The Geography Portal Transportation geography Geography is the science that studies the lands, the features, the inhabitants, and the phenomena of the Earth. A literal translation would be "to describe or write about the Earth". The first person to use the word "geography" was Eratosthenes (276–194 BC). Four historical traditions in geographical research are the spatial analysis of the natural and the human phenomena (geography as the study of distribution), the area studies (places and regions), the study of the human-land relationship, and research in the Earth sciences. Modern geography is an all-encompassing discipline that foremost seeks to understand the Earth and all of its human and natural complexities—not merely where objects are, but how they have changed and come to be. Geography has been called "the world discipline" and "the bridge between the human and the physical science". Geography is divided into two main branches: human geography and physical geography. More about geography… View new selections below (purge) edit   Featured article Karnataka is a state in South West India. It was created on 1 November 1956 with the passage of the States Reorganisation Act, and this day is annually celebrated as Karnataka Rajyotsava (Formation Day). Originally known as the State of Mysore, it was renamed Karnataka in 1973. It is the land of the Kannadiga, Tuluva, Konkani, and Kodava peoples. With over 61 million inhabitants as of 2011, Karnataka is the ninth largest state by population in India. Kannada is the most widely spoken and official language of the state. The two main river systems of the state are Krishna and its tributaries (Bhima, Ghataprabha, Vedavati, Malaprabha, and Tungabhadra) in the north, and the Cauvery and its tributaries (Hemavati, Shimsha, Arkavathi, Lakshmana Thirtha and Kabini) in the south. Both these rivers flow eastward and fall into the Bay of Bengal. With an antiquity that dates to the paleolithic, Karnataka has also been home to some of the most powerful empires of ancient and medieval India. The philosophers and musical bards patronised by these empires launched socio-religious and literary movements which have endured to the present day. Karnataka has contributed significantly to both the Carnatic and Hindustani forms of Indian classical music. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   In this month 7 April 1985 – Premiere of National Geographic Explorer on Nickelodeon 10 April 1982 – Arrival of Ranulph Fiennes and Charles R. Burton at North Pole 13 April 2005 – Launch of Genographic Project by National Geographic Society and IBM 27 April 1521 – Death of Ferdinand Magellan (pictured), Portuguese explorer who led part of the first expedition around the world More anniversaries... edit   Did you know... ...that the megalithic Niedertiefenbach tomb in Hesse (pictured), Germany has at least ten discernible layers of burials from the New Stone Age? ... that Broad Avenue in Memphis, Tennessee, went from vacant storefronts to a vibrant arts district in less than a decade? ... that forest degradation and illegal exports threaten the survival of the Rainforest Chameleon? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Things you can do Here are some tasks awaiting attention: Article requests?: See Requested articles/Social sciences/Geography, cities, regions and named places and Missing articles about Locations Assess?: Tag related article talk pages with {{WikiProject Geography}}. To help assess the quality and importance of geography articles, please see: Unassessed geography articles and Unknown-importance geography articles. Cleanup?: See Geography articles needing attention Geography Geographic information system Geography of China Geostatistics History of geography Holarctic Kriging Philosophy of geography Urbanism Valley Copyedit?: Geographical feature Glossary of geography terms List of world map changes Regions of North America (See Regions of Africa) Regions of Oceania Regions of South America Demographics of Asia (See Demographics of Africa) Demographics of Oceania Cycle of erosion Outer Continental Shelf Tied island Deletion sorting?: Listed at Geographic related deletion discussions Expand?: TOP PRIORITY: expand articles in Outline of geography and Outlines of regions (one for each country and region) - these are general reference companions to the main articles on each country. Are your favorite countries covered yet? The lists completed enough to be transferred to article space can be found at Portal:Contents/Geography and places. Index of geography articles (replace redirect with an article index, see Index of psychology articles as an example) List of geographers Visual geography Geographical coordinates?: See Articles missing geocoordinate data by country Infobox?: See Geography articles needing infoboxes Map?: See Wikipedia requested maps Notability?: See Geography articles with topics of unclear notability Photo?: See Wikipedia requested photographs of places Stubs?: See Geography stubs edit   Featured biography Mary Anning was a British fossil collector, dealer and palaeontologist who became known around the world for important finds she made in the Jurassic marine fossil beds at Lyme Regis where she lived. Her work contributed to fundamental changes in scientific thinking about prehistoric life and the history of the earth. Her discoveries included the first ichthyosaur skeleton to be correctly identified, found when she was just twelve years old; the first two plesiosaur skeletons ever found; the first pterosaur skeleton located outside Germany; and important fish fossils. Her observations were critical to the discovery that coprolites were fossilised faeces. Geologist Henry De la Beche's Duria Antiquior, the first widely circulated pictorial representation of a scene from prehistoric life derived from fossil reconstructions, was based largely on fossils Anning had found. Her gender and social class prevented her from fully participating in the scientific community of 19th-century Britain, prevented her from joining the Geological Society of London, and prevented her from getting full credit for her work during her lifetime. After her death her unusual life story attracted increasing interest. In 2010 the Royal Society included Anning in a list of the ten British women who have most influenced the history of science. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories ? Geography ? Geography by place ? Geography-related lists ? Geography awards and competitions ? Branches of geography ? Geographic classifications ? Geography conferences ? Geography education ? Environmental studies ? Exploration ? Geocodes ? Geographers ? Geographic data and information ? Geographical zones ? History of geography ? Land systems ? Landscape ? Lists of countries by geography ? Navigation ? Geography organizations ? Places ? Geographical regions ? Surveying ? Geographical technology ? Geography terminology ? Town squares ? Works about geography ? Geographic images ? Geography stubs edit   WikiProjects Parent project WikiProject Geography Descendant projects Caves Cities Countries Country subdivisions Demographics Deserts Former countries Geographical coordinates Glaciers Islands Lakes Maps Mountains Protected areas Rivers Subdivisions of former countries Tropical cyclones Urban studies and planning Volcanoes Waterfalls Related projects WikiProject Globalization What are WikiProjects? edit   Featured picture Credit: Ikiwaner Dead Acacia erioloba trees in Deadvlei, a white claypan inside Namib-Naukluft Park in the Namib Desert of Namibia. Deadvlei is surrounded by the highest sand dunes in the world, averaging 350 metres (1,150 ft) high. About 900 years ago, drought caused the dunes to block the Tsauchab river, which in turn killed the trees. However, because the desert is so dry, they do not decompose. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Selected quote “ Roll on, thou deep and dark blue Ocean—roll! / Ten thousand fleets sweep over thee in vain; / Man marks the earth with ruin—his control / Stops with the shore. ” — Lord Byron, Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, Canto IV (1818) ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Articles Antarctica Afro-Eurasia Americas Australia Africa Eurasia North America Oceania Europe Asia South America Supercontinents: Gondwana • Laurasia • Pangaea • Rodinia edit   Subportals Africa Antarctica Arctic Asia Caribbean Central America Europe European Union Islands Latin America Mediterranean Middle East North America Oceania Oceans South America edit   Related portals Atlas Atmosphere Atmospheric sciences Disasters Earth sciences Earthquakes Energy Environment Global warming Islands Mountains Physics Political science Science Seamounts Sociology Sustainable development Tropical cyclones Volcanoes Water Weather edit   Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Wikispecies  Species What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Geography&oldid=709404983" Categories: Geography Geography portals Geography portal Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Bosanski Català Cebuano ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Dansk Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk Gagauz ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? ????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? N?huatl Nederlands ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ???? ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? Scots Seeltersk Shqip ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ????? Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Vèneto Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 10 March 2016, at 18:53. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:History |||Portal:History From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology  History Ancient Egypt Ancient Germanic Culture Ancient Greece Ancient Japan Ancient Near East Ancient Rome Anglo-Saxon England Archaeology Austria-Hungary  British Empire Bulgarian Empire Byzantine Empire Classical civilisation Colonialism Crusades Dacia Disasters German Empire Heraldry History of Canada  History of science Imperial China Indian independence movement Khitan Latter Day Saint movement Middle Ages Mughal Empire New France Ottoman Empire Russian Empire Sasanian Empire Seljuk Empire Soviet Union  War edit   The History Portal This is the Place Monument History is the discovery, collection, organization, analysis, and presentation of information about past events. History can also mean a continuous, typically chronological record of important or public events or of a particular trend or institution. Scholars who write about history are called historians. It is a field of knowledge which uses a narrative to examine and analyse the sequence of events, and it sometimes attempts to objectively investigate the patterns of cause and effect that determine events. Historians debate the nature of history and its usefulness. This includes discussing the study of the discipline as an end in itself and as a way of providing "perspective" on the problems of the present. The stories common to a particular culture but not supported by external sources (such as the legends surrounding King Arthur) are usually classified as cultural heritage rather than as the "disinterested investigation" needed by the discipline of history. Events of the past prior to written record are considered prehistory. Amongst scholars, fifth century BC Greek historian Herodotus is considered to be the "father of history"; the methods of Herodotus along with his contemporary Thucydides form the foundations for the modern study of history. Their influence (along with other historical traditions in other parts of their world) has spawned many different interpretations of the nature of history which has developed over the centuries and are continuing to change. The modern study of history has many different fields, including those that focus on certain regions and those that focus on certain topical or thematic elements of historical investigation. Often, history is taught as part of primary and secondary education, and the academic study of history is a major discipline in university studies. More about History… View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article The formal unification of Germany into a politically and administratively integrated nation state officially occurred on 18 January 1871 at the Versailles Palace's Hall of Mirrors in France. Princes of the German states gathered there to proclaim Wilhelm of Prussia as Emperor Wilhelm of the German Empire after the French capitulation in the Franco-Prussian War. Unofficially, the transition of most of the German-speaking populations into a federated organization of states occurred over nearly a century of experimentation. Unification exposed several glaring religious, linguistic, social, and cultural differences between and among the inhabitants of the new nation, suggesting that 1871 only represents one moment in a continuum of the larger unification processes. The model of diplomatic spheres of influence resulting from the Congress of Vienna in 1814–15 after the Napoleonic Wars endorsed Austrian dominance in Central Europe. However, the negotiators at Vienna took no account of Prussia's growing strength within and among the German states, failing to foresee that Prussia would challenge Austria for leadership within the German states. This German dualism presented two solutions to the problem of unification: Kleindeutsche Lösung, the small Germany solution (Germany without Austria), or Großdeutsche Lösung, greater Germany solution (Germany with Austria). Reaction to Danish and French nationalism provided foci for expressions of German unity. Military successes—especially Prussian ones—in three regional wars generated enthusiasm and pride that politicians could harness to promote unification. This experience echoed the memory of mutual accomplishment in the Napoleonic Wars, particularly in the War of Liberation of 1813–14. By establishing a Germany without Austria, the political and administrative unification in 1871 at least temporarily solved the problem of dualism. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Selected biography Pericles (Greek: ????????, Perikl?s, "surrounded by glory"; c. 495 – 429 BC) was a prominent and influential statesman, orator, and general of Athens during the city's Golden Age—specifically, the time between the Persian and Peloponnesian wars. He was descended, through his mother, from the powerful and historically influential Alcmaeonid family. Pericles had such a profound influence on Athenian society that Thucydides, his contemporary historian, acclaimed him as "the first citizen of Athens". Pericles turned the Delian League into an Athenian empire and led his countrymen during the first two years of the Peloponnesian War. The period during which he led Athens, roughly from 461 to 429 BC, is sometimes known as the "Age of Pericles", though the period thus denoted can include times as early as the Persian Wars, or as late as the next century. Pericles promoted the arts and literature; this was a chief reason Athens holds the reputation of being the educational and cultural centre of the ancient Greek world. He started an ambitious project that generated most of the surviving structures on the Acropolis (including the Parthenon). This project beautified the city, exhibited its glory, and gave work to the people. Furthermore, Pericles fostered Athenian democracy to such an extent that critics call him a populist. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Did you know... ... that on 26 April 1881 HMS Doterel (pictured) exploded, killing 143 of the 155 crew members? ... that causes of the deaths at the Berlin Wall included shooting, drowning, suffocation, suicide, and falling from a balloon? ... that the 19th-century swindler Bertha Heyman, known as "The Confidence Queen," conned men by pretending to be a wealthy woman who was unable to access her fortune? ... that only four great uncial codices have survived until the present day? ... that after World War II, Polish resistance organizer and Warsaw Uprising fighter Jan Mazurkiewicz was brutally tortured by the authorities in communist Poland? ... that tiny Paederus beetles may have caused some of the ten Plagues of Egypt? ... that the only known report of bloodshed during the simulated Nazi invasion of Winnipeg was from a woman who cut her thumb while preparing toast? ... that Dacian bracelets were used as currency and votive offerings? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Selected picture The Trinity nuclear test was the first nuclear detonation in the world. Conducted by the United States Army on July 16, 1945, the successful test would set the stage for the coming Atomic Age. This image, captured by Berlyn Brixner, shows the fireball that developed 0.016 seconds after ignition; the explosive had a yield of 20 kilotons of dynamite. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   On this day April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries edit   Selected quote Victorious warriors win first and then go to war, while defeated warriors go to war first and then seek to win. —?Sun Tzu, Ancient Chinese military strategist ...Archive More... edit   Selected portal Classical civilisation "The ideas which now pass for brilliant innovations and advances are in fact mere revivals of ancient errors, and a further proof of the dictum that those who are ignorant of the past are condemned to repeat it." — Henry Hazlitt ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Things you can do    Here are some Open Tasks : Copy/edit: Hongwu Emperor, Indian independence movement, Modern history, More... Wikify: Merge: More... Requests: , More... Stubs: Panhellenic Liberation Movement, More... Requested pictures - of history topics Are you a historian, i.e. one who studies and writes history, and who has a keen interest in writing outstanding articles? Join our fine group by adding Category:Wikipedian historians to the bottom of your user page. edit   WikiProjects History Ancient Near East • Australian History • Classical Greece and Rome • Dacia • Former countries • History of Canada • Chinese history • European history • Heraldry and vexillology • Indian history • Jewish history • Medieval Scotland • Mesoamerica • Military history • Middle Ages • History of Science Time Days of the Year • Years Biography Composers • Political figures • Saints • United States Presidents   Topics v t e Social sciences Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural linguistics social Economics microeconomics macroeconomics Geography human integrative History cultural economic political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems Political science international relations psephology public administration public policy Psychology abnormal biological cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental (social science studies) Food studies Gender studies Global studies History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Media studies Philosophy of science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Social work Other categorizations Humanities Geisteswissenschaft Human science Index Journals Outline Wikiversity v t e Humanities Anthropology Digital Humanities History Law Literature Performing arts Politics Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts v t e Time Key concepts Human Life Nature Past history deep time Present Future Futures studies Far future in religion Far future in science fiction and popular culture Timeline of the far future Eternity Eternity of the world Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC UT TAI Unit of time Planck time Second Minute Hour Day Week Month Year Decade Century Millennium Tropical year Sidereal year Measurement systems Time zone 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Daylight saving time Solar time Sidereal time Metric time Decimal time Hexadecimal time Calendars Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Lunar Solar Hijri Mayan Intercalation Leap second Leap year Clocks Horology History of timekeeping devices Main types astrarium atomic quantum marine sundial sundial markup schema watch water-based Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Chronicle Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Religion Mythology Dreamtime K?la Kalachakra Prophecy Time and fate deities Wheel of time Immortality Philosophy of time A-series and B-series B-theory of time Causality Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Human experience and use of time Accounting period Chronemics Fiscal year Generation time Mental chronometry Music Procrastination Punctuality Temporal database Term Time discipline Time management Time perception Specious present Time-tracking software Time-use research Time-based currency (time banking) Time value of money Time clock Timesheet Yesterday Time in Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute time and space Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Imaginary time Planck epoch Planck time Proper time Rate Spacetime Theory of relativity Time dilation gravitational Time domain T-symmetry other subject areas Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Dating methodologies in archaeology Time geography Related topics Carpe diem Clock position Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time complexity Time signature Time travel Time portal v t e Chronology Key topics Archaeology Astronomy Geology History Human Life Nature Paleontology Time Eras Epochs Calendar eras Human Era Ab urbe condita Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Mundi Byzantine era Seleucid era Spanish era Before Present Hijri Egyptian Sothic cycle Hindu units of time (Yuga) Mesoamerican Long Count Short Count Tzolk'in Haab' Regnal year Canon of Kings Lists of kings Limmu Era names Chinese Japanese Korean Vietnamese Calendars Pre-Julian / Julian Pre-Julian Roman Original Julian Proleptic Julian Revised Julian Gregorian Gregorian Proleptic Gregorian Old Style and New Style dates Adoption of the Gregorian calendar Dual dating Astronomical Lunisolar Solar Lunar Astronomical year numbering Others Chinese sexagenary cycle Geologic Calendar Hebrew Iranian Islamic ISO week date Mesoamerican Maya Aztec Winter count (Plains Indians) Astronomic time Cosmic Calendar Ephemeris Galactic year Metonic cycle Milankovitch cycles Geologic time Concepts Deep time Geological history of Earth Geological time units Standards Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA) Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) Methods Chronostratigraphy Geochronology Isotope geochemistry Law of superposition Luminescence dating Samarium-neodymium dating Chronological dating Absolute dating Amino acid racemisation Archaeomagnetic dating Dendrochronology Ice core Incremental dating Lichenometry Paleomagnetism Radiometric dating Radiocarbon Uranium–lead Potassium-argon Tephrochronology Luminescence dating Relative dating Fluorine absorption Nitrogen dating Obsidian hydration Seriation Stratigraphy Genetic methods Molecular clock Linguistic methods Glottochronology Related topics Chronicle New Chronology Periodization Synchronoptic view Timeline Year Zero Circa Floruit Terminus post quem ASPRO chronology Portal edit   Categories History • By period • By region • By topic • By ethnic group • Historiography • Archaeology • Books • Documents • Maps • Images • Magazines • Organizations • Fictional • Museums • Pseudohistory • Stubs • Timelines • Chronology • People • Wikipedia historians ? History ? History by ethnic group ? History by location ? History by period ? History by topic ? Fields of history ? Historians ? History-related lists ? History awards ? Bible history ? Chronology ? Historical controversies ? Economic, social and political strategies ? History education ? Historical eras ? Events ? Historically themed events ? Historical geography ? Historicity ? Historiography ? Legacies ? Media history ? Historical objects ? Oral history ? History organizations ? Phaleristics ? Philosophy of history ? Historic preservation ? Pseudohistory ? Sacred history ? Theories of history ? Historical timelines ? Works about history ? World history ? Wikipedia books on history ? History images ? History stubs   Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Wikispecies  Species What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:History&oldid=749756545" Categories: History portal History portals History Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikisource Wikiversity Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ??????? ?????? ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Euskara ????? Français Frysk Gagauz Galego G?k?y? ??? ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? ?????? ????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? Nederlands ??? Napulitano ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ?????? ???? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? West-Vlams Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 16 November 2016, at 00:57. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Mathematics |||Portal:Mathematics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology edit   The Mathematics Portal Square root Mathematics is the study of numbers, quantity, space, structure, and change. Mathematics is used throughout the world as an essential tool in many fields, including natural science, engineering, medicine, and the social sciences. Applied mathematics, the branch of mathematics concerned with application of mathematical knowledge to other fields, inspires and makes use of new mathematical discoveries and sometimes leads to the development of entirely new mathematical disciplines, such as statistics and game theory. Mathematicians also engage in pure mathematics, or mathematics for its own sake, without having any application in mind. There is no clear line separating pure and applied mathematics, and practical applications for what began as pure mathematics are often discovered. More about Mathematics... Selected article | Selected picture | Did you know... | Topics in mathematics Categories | WikiProjects | Things you can do | Index | Related portals There are approximately 31,444 mathematics articles in Wikipedia. View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article Carl Friedrich Gauss Image credit: C.A. Jensen (1792-1870) Carl Friedrich Gauss (30 April 1777 – 23 February 1855) was a German mathematician and scientist of profound genius who contributed significantly to many fields, including number theory, analysis, differential geometry, geodesy, electricity, magnetism, astronomy and optics. Known as "the prince of mathematicians" and "greatest mathematician since antiquity", Gauss had a remarkable influence in many fields of mathematics and science and is ranked as one of history's most influential mathematicians. Gauss was a child prodigy, of whom there are many anecdotes pertaining to his astounding precocity while a mere toddler, and made his first ground-breaking mathematical discoveries while still a teenager. He completed Disquisitiones Arithmeticae, his magnum opus, at the age of twenty-one (1798), though it wasn't published until 1801. This work was fundamental in consolidating number theory as a discipline and has shaped the field to the present day. View all selected articles Read More... edit   Selected picture Credit: BenFrantzDale A Lorenz curve shows the distribution of income in a population by plotting the percentage y of total income that is earned by the bottom x percent of households (or individuals). Developed by economist Max O. Lorenz in 1905 to describe income inequality, the curve is typically plotted with a diagonal line (reflecting a hypothetical "equal" distribution of incomes) for comparison. This leads naturally to a derived quantity called the Gini coefficient, first published in 1912 by Corrado Gini, which is the ratio of the area between the diagonal line and the curve (area A in this graph) to the area under the diagonal line (the sum of A and B); higher Gini coefficients reflect more income inequality. Lorenz's curve is a special kind of cumulative distribution function used to characterize quantities that follow a Pareto distribution, a type of power law. More specifically, it can be used to illustrate the Pareto principle, a rule of thumb stating that roughly 80% of the identified "effects" in a given phenomenon under study will come from 20% of the "causes" (in the first decade of the 20th century Vilfredo Pareto showed that 80% of the land in Italy was owned by 20% of the population). As this so-called "80–20 rule" implies a specific level of inequality (i.e., a specific power law), more or less extreme cases are possible. For example, in the United States in the first half of the 2010s, 95% of the financial wealth was held by the top 20% of wealthiest households (in 2010), the top 1% of individuals held approximately 40% of the wealth (2012), and the top 1% of income earners received approximately 20% of the pre-tax income (2013). Observations such as these have brought income and wealth inequality into popular consciousness and have given rise to various slogans about "the 1%" versus "the 99%". More selected pictures... Read more... edit   Did you know... ... that economists blame market failures on non-convexity? ... that, according to the pizza theorem, a circular pizza that is sliced off-center into eight equal-angled wedges can still be divided equally between two people? ... that the clique problem of programming a computer to find complete subgraphs in an undirected graph was first studied as a way to find groups of people who all know each other in social networks? ... that the Herschel graph is the smallest possible polyhedral graph that does not have a Hamiltonian cycle? ... that the Life without Death cellular automaton, a mathematical model of pattern formation, is a variant of Conway's Game of Life in which cells, once brought to life, never die? ... that one can list every positive rational number without repetition by breadth-first traversal of the Calkin–Wilf tree? ... that the Hadwiger conjecture implies that the external surface of any three-dimensional convex body can be illuminated by only eight light sources, but the best proven bound is that 16 lights are sufficient?                           Showing 7 items out of 72 More did you know edit   WikiProjects The Mathematics WikiProject is the center for mathematics-related editing on Wikipedia. Join the discussion on the project's talk page. Project pages Participants Current activity Manual of style Conventions Essays Advice on using Wikipedia for mathematics self-study Proofs Subprojects PlanetMath Exchange (Talk) Graphics (Talk) Article assessment (Talk) Related projects Computer science | Cryptography | Game theory | Numbers | Physics | Science | Statistics edit   Things you can do Create a new article: See requested articles list Add a new image: Requested images list Improve articles: Pages needing attention (Category) Expand articles: Mathematics stubs edit   Categories Algebra | Arithmetic | Analysis | Complex analysis | Applied mathematics | Calculus | Category theory | Chaos theory | Combinatorics | Dynamic systems | Fractals | Game theory | Geometry | Algebraic geometry | Graph theory | Group theory | Linear algebra | Mathematical logic | Model theory | Multi-dimensional geometry | Number theory | Numerical analysis | Optimization | Order theory | Probability and statistics | Set theory | Statistics | Topology | Algebraic topology | Trigonometry | Linear programming Mathematics (books) | History of mathematics | Mathematicians | Awards | Education | Literature | Notation | Organizations | Theorems | Proofs | Unsolved problems ? Mathematics ? Fields of mathematics ? Mathematics-related lists ? Mathematicians ? Mathematical concepts ? Mathematics and culture ? Mathematical examples ? History of mathematics ? Mathematics and art ? Mathematical modeling ? Mathematical notation ? Mathematical science occupations ? Philosophy of mathematics ? Mathematical projects ? Mathematical proofs ? Pseudomathematics ? Set indices on mathematics ? Mathematical terminology ? Mathematics textbooks ? Mathematical theorems ? Mathematical tools ? Women in mathematics ? Wikipedia books on mathematics ? Mathematics stubs More mathematics categories edit   Topics in mathematics General Foundations Number theory Discrete mathematics Mathematicians History of mathematics Philosophy of mathematics Mathematical notation Mathematical beauty Mathematics education Areas of mathematics List of basic mathematics topics List of mathematical symbols Wikipedia Books: Mathematics Foundations of mathematics Mathematical logic Proof theory Gödel's incompleteness theorems Model theory Recursion theory Set theory (portal) Naive set theory Axiomatic set theory Category theory (portal) Topos theory Number theory (portal) Algebraic number theory Analytic number theory Arithmetic Fundamental theorem of arithmetic Numbers Natural numbers Prime numbers Rational numbers Algebraic numbers Discrete mathematics (portal) Combinatorics Combinatorial geometry Coding theory Combinatorial design Enumerative combinatorics Combinatorial optimization Graph theory Order theory Lattice theory Algebra Analysis Geometry and topology Applied mathematics Algebra (portal) Elementary algebra Abstract algebra Group theory Ring theory Field theory Commutative algebra Geometric algebra Linear algebra Matrix theory Multilinear algebra Universal algebra Fundamental theorem of algebra Analysis (portal) Calculus Fundamental theorem of calculus Vector calculus Geometric calculus Measure theory Real analysis Complex analysis Differential equations Ordinary differential equations Partial differential equations Integral equations Approximation theory Special functions Potential theory Harmonic analysis Fourier analysis Functional analysis Operator theory Geometry (portal) Euclidean geometry Trigonometry Analytic geometry Non-Euclidean geometry Affine geometry Projective geometry Convex geometry Discrete geometry Algebraic geometry Differential geometry Riemannian geometry Lie groups Topology (portal) General topology Algebraic topology Geometric topology Differential topology Applied mathematics Mathematical modeling Mathematical physics Dynamical systems Control theory Calculus of variations Optimization Mathematical economics Game theory Mathematical finance Statistics (portal) Probability theory Stochastic processes Numerical analysis Theoretical computer science Computability theory Complexity theory Cryptography (portal) Information theory edit   Index of mathematics articles ARTICLE INDEX: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z (0–9) MATHEMATICIANS: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z edit   Related portals Algebra Analysis Category theory Computer science Cryptography Discrete mathematics Geometry Logic Mathematics Number theory Physics Science Set theory Statistics Topology Science History of science    Philosophy of science    Systems science    Mathematics    Biology    Chemistry    Physics    Earth sciences    Technology    What are portals? List of portals edit   In other Wikimedia projects The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Mathematics&oldid=686628022" Categories: Mathematics portal Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikinews Wikisource Wikiversity Languages ???? ??????? ???? ????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français G?k?y? ??? ??????? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Lietuvi? Lumbaart Magyar ?????????? Malti Bahasa Melayu ?????????? Nederlands ??? O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? Shqip ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Suomi Svenska ????? Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 20 October 2015, at 08:24. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Science |||Portal:Science From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Science History of science    Philosophy of science    Systems science    Mathematics    Biology    Chemistry    Physics    Earth sciences    Technology    Main page   Categories & Main topics   Related portals & WikiProjects   Things you can do edit The Science Portal For a topic outline of science, see Outline of science. Meissner effect Science is the methodical study of nature including testable explanations and predictions. From classical antiquity through the 19th century, science as a type of knowledge was more closely linked to philosophy than it is now and, in fact, in the Western world, the term "natural philosophy" encompassed fields of study that are today associated with science, such as astronomy, medicine, and physics. However, during the Islamic Golden Age foundations for the scientific method were laid by Ibn al-Haytham in his Book of Optics. While the classification of the material world by the ancient Indians and Greeks into air, earth, fire and water was more philosophical, medieval Middle Easterns used practical, experimental observation to classify materials. Today, the ever-evolving term "science" refers to the pursuit of knowledge, not the knowledge itself. It is often synonymous with "natural and physical science" and often restricted to those branches of study relating to the phenomena of the material universe and their laws. Although the term implies exclusion of pure mathematics, many university faculties include Mathematics Departments within their Faculty of Science. The dominant sense in ordinary use has a narrower use for the term "science." It developed as a part of science becoming a distinct enterprise of defining the "laws of nature"; early examples include Kepler's laws, Galileo's laws, and Newton's laws of motion. In this period it became more common to refer to natural philosophy as "natural science." Over the course of the 19th century, the word "science" became increasingly associated with the disciplined study of the natural world, including physics, chemistry, geology and biology. This sometimes left the study of human thought and society in a linguistic limbo, which was resolved by classifying these areas of academic study as social science. For example, psychology evolved from philosophy, and has grown into an area of study. Currently, there are both "hard" (e.g. biological psychology) and "soft" science (e.g. social psychology) fields within the discipline. As a result, and as is consistent with the unfolding of the study of knowledge and development of methods to establish facts, each area of psychology employs a scientific method. Reflecting the evolution of the development of knowledge and established facts and the use of the scientific method, Psychology Departments in universities are found within: Faculty of Arts and Science, Faculty of Arts, and a Faculty of Science. Similarly, several other major areas of disciplined study and knowledge exist today under the general rubric of "science", such as formal science and applied science. More about Science... View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article A space elevator is a hypothetical structure designed to transport material from a planet's surface into space. Many different types of space elevator structures have been proposed. They all share the goal of replacing rocket propulsion with the traversal of a fixed structure via a mechanism not unlike an elevator, hence its name, in order to move material into or beyond orbit. Space elevators have also sometimes been referred to as space bridges, beanstalks, space ladders or space lifts. The most common proposal is a tether (usually a cable or ribbon) that spans from the surface to a point beyond geosynchronous orbit. As the planet rotates, the inertia at the end of the tether counteracts gravity and keeps the tether taut. Vehicles can then climb the tether and escape the planet's gravity without the use of rockets. Such a structure could eventually permit delivery of great quantities of cargo and people to orbit, and at costs only a fraction of those associated with current means. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Selected picture Credit: Earth Sciences and Image Analysis Laboratory, NASA View of the Earth as seen by the Apollo 17 crew traveling toward the moon. This translunar coast photograph extends from the Mediterranean Sea area to the Antarctica south polar ice cap. This is toward the northeast. Earth, also known as Terra, and (mostly in the 19th century) Tellus, is the third-closest planet to the Sun. It is the largest of the solar system's terrestrial planets and the only planetary body that modern science confirms as harboring life. Scientific evidence indicates that the planet formed around 4.57 billion years ago, and shortly thereafter (4.533 billion years ago) acquired its single natural satellite, the Moon. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Selected biography Carl Edward Sagan (November 9, 1934 – December 20, 1996) was an American astronomer, astrobiologist, and highly successful science popularizer. He pioneered exobiology and promoted the Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence (SETI). He is world-famous for writing popular science books and for co-writing and presenting the award-winning 1980 television series Cosmos: A Personal Voyage, which was the most-watched PBS program until Ken Burns' The Civil War in 1990. A book to accompany the program was also published. He also wrote the novel Contact, the basis for the 1997 film of the same name starring Jodie Foster. During his lifetime, Sagan published more than 600 scientific papers and popular articles and was author, co-author, or editor of more than 20 books. In his works, he frequently advocated scientific skepticism, humanism, and the scientific method. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Did you know... ...that the endangered golden lion tamarin (pictured) has a long, but not prehensile, tail? ...that the Witch's hat is the common name of a colourful orange-red toadstool? ...that Grandi's series 1 ? 1 + 1 ? 1 + • • • is divergent and appears to equal 0, yet in some sense "sums" to 1?2 — a paradox once linked to the creation ex nihilo of the universe? ...that Derek Freeman was an anthropologist whose refutation of Margaret Mead's work "ignited controversy of a scale, visibility, and ferocity never before seen in anthropology"? ...that the New Year's Eve snowstorm of 1963/1964 dropped over 17 inches of snow at Huntsville, Alabama, simultaneously setting new snowfall records for any day, week, or month in their history? ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Associated Wikimedia Science portal on Wikinews     Science on Wikiquote     Science subject on Wikibooks     Science portal on Wikisource     Science category on Wikicommons     Science category on Wiktionary     Wikiversity School of Science News Quotations Manuals Texts Images Definitions Learning Wikipedia's Portals All Portals Overview Glossaries Indices Lists Outlines Categories Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Featured portals About portals Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Science&oldid=714543061" Categories: Science portal Science Science portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikinews Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Català Cebuano Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Limburgs ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ????? Oromoo O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ?????? Português Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ??????? Seeltersk Setswana ????? ???? Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ?????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? ?? Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?????? ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 10 April 2016, at 11:29. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Society |||Portal:Society From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Sociology portals: Arts · Anthropology · Community · Culture · Economics · Education · Geography · Gender studies · Globalization · History · Human rights · Internet · Law · Philosophy · Social movements · Social sciences · Social welfare and social work · Society edit   The Society Portal Social network analysis diagram A human society is a group of people related to each other through continued relations, or a large social grouping sharing the same geographical or virtual territory, same interests, subject to the same political authority and dominant cultural expectations. Human societies are characterized by patterns of relationships (social relations) between individuals who share a distinctive culture and institutions. A given society may be described as the sum total of such relationships among its constituent members. In the social sciences, a larger society often evinces stratification and/or dominance patterns in subgroups. In so far as it is collaborative, a society can enable its members to benefit in ways that would not otherwise be possible on an individual basis; both individual and social (common) benefits can thus be distinguished, or in many cases found to overlap. A society can also consist of like-minded people governed by their own norms and values within a dominant, larger society. This is sometimes referred to as a subculture, a term used extensively within criminology: an organized group working together having a common interests, beliefs, or profession. More broadly, a society may be described as an economic, social, or industrial infrastructure, made up of a varied collection of individuals or subgroups. Members of a society may be from different ethnic groups. A society can be a particular ethnic group, such as the Saxons; a nation state, such as Bhutan; or a broader cultural group, such as a Western society. The word society may also refer to an organized voluntary association of people for religious, benevolent, cultural, scientific, political, patriotic, or other purposes. A "society" may also be a group of social organisms such as an ant colony, or any cooperative aggregate such as, for example, in some formulations of artificial intelligence. More about society… View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article The Tamil people are an ethnic group from South Asia with a recorded history going back almost two millennia. The oldest Tamil communities are those of southern India and north-eastern Sri Lanka. Unlike many ethnic groups, the Tamils have at no time been governed by a single political entity; Tamil?akam, the traditional name for the Tamil lands, has always been under the rule of more than one kingdom or state. Despite this, the Tamil cultural identity has always been strong. Historically, this identity has been primarily linguistic, with Tamils being those whose first language was Tamil. In recent times, however, the definition has been broadened to also include emigrants of Tamil descent who maintain Tamil traditions, even when they no longer speak the language. Tamils are ethnically, linguistically and culturally related to the other Dravidian peoples of South Asia. There are an estimated 74 million Tamils around the world. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured picture Credit: Photo: Marcello Casal Jr, Agência Brasil A United Nations vehicle patrols the streets of the Bel-Air neighborhood of Port-au-Prince in the aftermath of the catastrophic 2010 Haiti earthquake. The earthquake occurred at 16:53 local time (21:53 UTC) on Tuesday, 12 January 2010. An estimated three million people were affected by the earthquake, with an estimated 280,000 buildings severely damaged or destroyed. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Did you know... ... that the desert plants pale wolfberry (pictured) and Berlandier's wolfberry were both used by native Americans for medicinal purposes? ... that the Central Committee of the Commission for Organizing the Party of the Working People of Ethiopia included only one woman? ... that in 1992 the leader of the Gambela People's Liberation Movement, Agwa Alemu, was killed by his own troops? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Anniversaries this month 4 April 1930 - Foundation of the American Rocket Society, originally named the American Interplanetary Society 13 April 1564 - Pope Pius IV approved the Society of the Holy Name 19 April 1866 - First anti-cruelty law was passed since the founding of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Brooklyn chapter pictured) 22 April 2008 - IEEE Power Engineering Society changed its name to IEEE Power & Energy Society More anniversaries... edit   Selected biography Dyer Daniel Lum (1839–April 6, 1893) was a 19th-century American anarchist labor activist and poet. A leading anarcho-syndicalist and a prominent left-wing intellectual of the 1880s, he is remembered as the lover and mentor of early anarcha-feminist Voltairine de Cleyre. Lum was a prolific writer who wrote a number of key anarchist texts, and contributed to publications including Mother Earth, Twentieth Century, Liberty (Benjamin Tucker's individualist anarchist journal), The Alarm (the journal of the International Working People's Association) and The Open Court among others. Following the arrest of Albert Parsons, Lum edited The Alarm from 1892–1893. Traditionally portrayed as a "genteel, theoretical anarchist", Lum has recently been recast by the scholarship of Paul Avrich as an "uncompromising rebel thirsty for violence and martyrdom" in the light of his involvement in the Haymarket affair in 1886. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured audio January 28, 2008 – State of the Union Address by President George W. Bush George W. Bush's address, given on the first floor of the House of Representatives at the Capitol. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories Society ? Society portal ? Society by continent ? Society by nationality ? Sociology ? Fictional society ? Anti-social behaviour ? Business ? Civil society ? Clubs and societies ? Communication ? Corporate groups ? Crime ? Culture ? Disability ? Economics ? Education ? Social events ? Family ? Feminism and society ? Society in fiction ? Folklore ? Health ? Social history ? Home ? Humans ? Inequality ? Social institutions ? Social issues ? Society-related lists ? Mating systems ? Matronymics ? Medicine in society ? Military ? Society museums ? Nationality ? Organizations ? Patronymics ? People ? Philosophy and society ? Politics ? Postindustrial society ? Private law ? Race and society ? Religion and society ? Rural society ? Science in society ? Sexuality and society ? Social change ? Social media ? Social responsibility ? Social sciences ? Social work ? Socioeconomics ? Technology in society ? Water and society ? Wikipedia books on society ? Society portals edit   WikiProjects Related projects Community Ethnic groups Family and relationships Former countries Gender Studies LGBT studies Literature Sexology and sexuality Sociology Travel and Tourism What are WikiProjects? edit   Selected quote “ The basic discovery about any people is the discovery of the relationship between its men and its women. ” — Pearl S. Buck ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Recognized content Featured articles 2012 phenomenon W. E. B. Du Bois Female genital mutilation From The Doctor to my son Thomas Fuck (film) Fuck: Word Taboo and Protecting Our First Amendment Liberties Featured lists List of awards and nominations received by Penn & Teller: Bullshit! Good articles Timeline of the Egyptian revolution of 2011 Acting white African Americans in Omaha, Nebraska Agnosticism America's 60 Families Anarchism Anarchism in Cuba Anonymous (group) Anti-nuclear movement in Australia Archaeoastronomy Average Joe Balangoda Man Before the Dawn (book) Birth control Black Lives Matter Boerehaat The Bog People Bomis A Community of Witches Compulsory Miseducation Cult film Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact Culture of the Song dynasty Cutting the Mustard The Daily Stormer Demographics of the Supreme Court of the United States Diaphoneme Double burden Dreamtime (book) Émile Durkheim EST and The Forum in popular culture Ely and Littleport riots of 1816 Family in advertising Family structure in the United States Feminism Feminist economics The finger First World First interracial kiss on television Forensic anthropology Free Expression Policy Project Fucking Machines God's Choice Erving Goffman History of agriculture Hitachi Magic Wand Hooray Henry I Ching Globalization and women in China Insects in culture Ivatan people Java Man Joint custody (United States) Ralph Larkin Lesbian LGBT Long hair Magic, Witchcraft and the Otherworld The Man-Eating Myth March of loyalty to martyrs Karl Marx Josef Mengele A More Perfect Union: Advancing New American Rights Mork Goes Erk No Lifeguard on Duty Nonviolent Communication Not My Presidents Day Not in Front of the Children On the Internet, nobody knows you're a dog Otaku Polyethnicity Protests against the Sri Lankan Civil War in Canada Proto-globalization Racial wage gap in the United States Reborn doll The Road to Total Freedom Romania in the Early Middle Ages Royal intermarriage Edward Said Sex, Sin, and Blasphemy Sheng nu Social identity theory Sociology of leisure Sociology Stay-at-home dad Sustainability Team effectiveness Think of the children Truce term Max Weber Benjamin Lee Whorf Florian Znaniecki Featured pictures File:Jane Addams - Bain News Service.jpg edit   Things you can do Here are some tasks awaiting attention: Article requests?: Check article requests in Business and economics topics • Social sciences topics • Requested pictures of society topics Assess?: Check article deletion discussions listed at Deletion sorting – Social science Cleanup?: check new articles for cleanup from Sociology-related new article feed Copyedit?: Check Sociology article alerts for interesting articles to copyedit Expand?: Expand articles in categories including: Culture, Law, Education, Politics Featured article candidates?: Review society-related articles submitted at Featured Article candidates, especially those at FAC urgents Good article nominations?: Check out articles under review for Good Article candidacy, in the Social sciences and society section Maintain?: Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Stubs?: Take on project for improvement of one of the Sociology stubs Verify?: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability edit   Related portals Arts Biography Community Culture Death Education Freedom of speech Human rights Internet Law LGBT Mind and brain Philosophy Politics Religion Sexuality Social movements Sociology Technology Writing edit   Web resources Society at DMOZ Definition of Society from the OED. Lecture notes on "Defining Society" from East Carolina University. Internet Modern History Sourcebook: Industrial Revolution "The Day the World Took Off" Six part video series from the University of Cambridge tracing the question "Why did the Industrial Revolution begin when and where it did." BBC History Home Page – Industrial Revolution National Museum of Science and Industry website – machines and personalities Industrial Revolution and the Standard of Living by Clark Nardinelli - the debate over whether standards of living rose or fell. Cliff Notes on Types of Societies edit   Associated Wikimedia Society on Wikibooks  Society on Wikimedia Commons Society on Wikinews  Society on Wikiquote  Society on Wikisource  Society on Wikiversity  Society on Wiktionary  Manuals and books Images and media News Quotations Texts Learning resources Definitions What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Society&oldid=649229924" Categories: Society portal Society Society portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ??????? ???? ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? Català Cebuano Deutsch Eesti ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? Bahasa Indonesia ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Lëtzebuergesch ?????????? Nederlands ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ?????? Polski Português ??????? ????? Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Suomi ???????/tatarça Türkçe ???? ?????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 28 February 2015, at 14:11. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology |||Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Science History of science    Philosophy of science    Systems science    Mathematics    Biology    Chemistry    Physics    Earth sciences    Technology    edit   The Technology Portal Astronaut Technology is the practical use of science, including the making, modification or improvement, applied activity or behavior, use and knowledge of tools, machines, techniques, crafts, systems, methods of organization, or environmental modifications or arrangement in order to solve a problem, improve a preexisting solution to a problem, achieve a goal or perform a specific function. It can also refer to the collection of such tools, machinery, modifications, environmental arrangement and procedures. Technologies significantly affect human as well as other animal species' ability to control and adapt to their natural environments. The word technology comes from Greek ?????????? (technología); from ????? (téchn?), meaning 'art, skill, craft', and -????? (-logía), meaning 'study of-'. The term can be applied either generally or to many specific areas, examples of which include construction technology, medical technology and information technology. The human species' use of technology began with the conversion of natural resources into simple tools. The prehistorical discovery of the ability to control fire increased the available sources of food and the invention of the wheel helped humans in travelling in and controlling their environment. Recent technological developments, including the printing press, the telephone, and the Internet, have lessened physical barriers to communication and allowed humans to interact freely on a global scale. However, not all technology has been used for peaceful purposes; the development of weapons of ever-increasing destructive power has progressed throughout history, from clubs to nuclear weapons. Technology has affected society and its surroundings in a number of ways. In many societies, technology has helped develop more advanced economies (including today's global economy) and has allowed the rise of a leisure class. Many technological processes produce unwanted by-products, known as pollution, and deplete natural resources, to the detriment of the Earth and its environment. Various implementations of technology influence the values of a society and new technology often raises new ethical questions. Examples include the rise of the notion of efficiency in terms of human productivity, a term originally applied only to machines, and the challenge of traditional norms. Philosophical debates have arisen over the present and future use of technology in society, with disagreements over whether technology improves the human condition or worsens it. Neo-Luddism, anarcho-primitivism, and similar movements criticise the pervasiveness of technology in the modern world, opining that it harms the environment and alienates people; proponents of ideologies such as transhumanism and techno-progressivism view continued technological progress as beneficial to society and the human condition. Indeed, until recently, it was believed that the development of technology was restricted only to human beings, but recent scientific studies indicate that other primates and certain dolphin communities have developed simple tools and learned to pass their knowledge to other generations. More about Technology... Refresh selections edit   Selected article The Hanford Site is a decommissioned nuclear production complex on the Columbia River in south-central Washington operated by the United States government. Established in 1943 as part of the Manhattan Project, it was home to the B-Reactor, the first full-scale plutonium production reactor in the world. During the Cold War, the project was expanded to include nine nuclear reactors and five massive plutonium processing complexes, which produced plutonium for most of the 60,000 weapons in the U.S. nuclear arsenal. Nuclear technology developed rapidly during this period, and Hanford scientists produced many notable technological achievements. However, many of the early safety procedures and waste disposal practices were inadequate. Government documents have since confirmed that Hanford's operations released significant amounts of radioactive materials to the air and to the Columbia River, threatening the health of residents and ecosystems. Today, Hanford is the most contaminated nuclear site in the United States and is the focus of the nation's largest environmental cleanup effort. While most of the current activity at the site is related to the cleanup project, Hanford also hosts a commercial nuclear power plant, the Columbia Generating Station, and various centers for scientific research and development. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   In this month 2 April 1975 – Construction of the CN Tower in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, tops out, beginning the 553.33 metres (1,815.4 ft) tower's 34 year reign as the world's tallest free-standing structure 3 April 2010 – The first iPad (pictured) is released by Apple, Inc. 10 April 1861 – Governor of Massachusetts John Albion Andrew signs a charter incorporating the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 15 April 1912 – The RMS Titanic, at the time the world's largest ship, sinks after hitting an iceberg the night before in one of the deadliest peacetime maritime disasters in history More anniversaries... edit   Did you know... ... that in 2010, three of the four largest power stations in the world were in South America? ... that a Rans S-6 Coyote II (pictured), a type of homebuilt aircraft, has flown across the Atlantic Ocean twice? ... that Stephen Fry asked on Twitter for suggestions to name a BBC television series on the impact of the Internet, now called The Virtual Revolution? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured biography John Douglas (1830–1911) was an English architect who designed about 500 buildings in Cheshire, North Wales and northwest England, in particular in the estate of Eaton Hall. Douglas' output included the creation, restoration and renovation of churches, church furnishings, houses and other buildings. His architectural styles were eclectic and many of his works incorporate elements of the English Gothic style. He was also influenced by architectural styles from the mainland of Europe and included elements of French, German and Netherlandish architecture into his works. He is remembered for his use of half-timbering, tile-hanging, pargeting, decorative brick in diapering and the design of tall chimney stacks. Of particular importance is Douglas' use of joinery and highly detailed wood carving. Throughout his career he attracted commissions from wealthy landowners and industrialists. Most of his works have survived. The city of Chester contains a number of his structures, the most admired of which are his half-timbered black-and-white buildings and Eastgate Clock. The highest concentration of his work is found in the Eaton Hall estate and the surrounding villages of Eccleston, Aldford and Pulford. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Wikiprojects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Telecommunications Woodworking What are WikiProjects? edit   Selected quote “ If the Internet teaches us anything, it is that great value comes from leaving core resources in a commons, where they're free for people to build upon as they see fit. ” — Lawrence Lessig, (2001) ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Selected picture Credit: Maas Digital LLC NASA's Mars Exploration Rover Mission (MER) is an ongoing robotic space mission involving two rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, exploring the planet Mars. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories Computing · Classes of computers · Companies · Computer architecture · Computer model · Computer science · Computer security · Computing and society · Data · Embedded systems · Information systems · Information technology · Internet · Languages · Multimedia · Networks · Operating systems · Platforms · Product lifecycle management · Real-time computing · Software · Security ·More... Electronics · Avionics · RF & MMIC Design · Circuits · Companies · Connectors · Consumer electronics · Digital electronics · Digital media · Electrical components · Electronic design · Electronics manufacturing · Embedded systems · Integrated circuits · Microwave technology · Molecular electronics · Water technology · Optoelectronics · Quantum electronics · Radio-frequency identification · Radio electronics · Semiconductors · Signal cables · Surveillance · Telecommunications · Terminology · More... Engineering: Aerospace engineering · Biological engineering · Chemical engineering · Civil engineering · Computer engineering · Electrical engineering · Electronic engineering · Environmental engineering · Geotechnical engineering · Industrial engineering · Marine engineering · Materials science · Mechanical engineering · Nuclear technology · Signal processing · Software engineering · Structural engineering Transport · Aviation · Rail transport · Spaceflight · Road transport · Water transport Timelines: Technology timelines Other sub-categories: Agriculture · Animation · Architecture · Carpentry · Communications · Education · Electrical wiring · Machining · Manufacturing · Medicine · Metalworking · Optics · Plumbing · Tools · Welding · Woodworking edit   Main topics Technology Technological concepts and issues – Appropriate technology • Clean technology • Diffusion of innovations in science • Doomsday device • Ecotechnology • Environmental technology • High technology • History of science and technology • History of technology • Industry • Innovation • Knowledge economy • Persuasion technology • Pollution • Posthumanism • Precautionary principle • Research and development • Science, technology, and society • Strategy of technology • Superpowers • Sustainable technology • Technicism • Technocapitalism • Technocriticism • Techno-progressivism • Technological convergence • Technological evolution • Technological determinism • Technological diffusion • Technological singularity • Technology acceptance model • Technology assessment • Technology lifecycle • Technology transfer • Technology Tree • Technorealism • Timeline of invention • Transhumanism Technologies and applied sciences – Aerospace • Agriculture, Agricultural science & Agronomy • Architecture • Artificial intelligence • Automation • Automobile • Big Science • Biotechnology • Cartography • Chemical engineering • Communication • Computing (Computer science, List of open problems in computer science, Programming, Software engineering, Information technology, Computer engineering) • Construction • Design • Electronics • Energy development • Energy storage • Engineering • Ergonomics • Firefighting • Forensics • Forestry • Free software • Health sciences • Health Informatics • Industry • Information science • Internet • Library and information science • Machines • Management • Manufacturing • Mass communication • Mass production • Medicine (Unsolved problems in neuroscience) • Military science • Military technology and equipment • Mining • Nanotechnology • Nuclear technology • Packaging and labeling • Processes • Robotics • Space exploration • Technology forecasting • Telecommunications • Tools • Transport • Vehicles • Weapons edit   News From the Wikinews Science and technology portal April 8: GNOME to be Ubuntu's default desktop environment, Canonical to stop investing in Ubuntu Phone March 27: President Trump tells NASA to aim for Mars March 22: Jeff Jones resigns as president of Uber March 9: Scientists say excess cerebrospinal fluid may serve as early sign of autism February 9: Scientists say new medical diagnostic chip can sort cells anywhere with an inkjet January 15: Geneticists produce laser-activated killer mice January 4: Slow-cooking dinosaur eggs may have contributed to extinction, say scientists December 29: Around 7,100 cheetahs remain, say experts December 26: Study confirms efficacy of NewLink Genetics ebola vaccine December 11: Scientists find dinosaur feathers preserved in amber edit   Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures edit   Related portals Agriculture and Agronomy Astronomy Aviation Biotechnology Bridges Computer science Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Health Infrastructure Information technology Mathematics Medicine Nanotechnology Nuclear technology Philosophy of science Radio Renewable energy Robotics Science Software Spaceflight Sustainable development Telecom Television Trains Transport War edit   Associated Wikimedia Technology on Wikibooks  Technology on Wikimedia Commons Technology on Wikinews  Technology on Wikiquote  Technology on Wikisource  Technology on Wikiversity  Technology on Wiktionary  Manuals and books Images and media News Quotations Texts Learning resources Definitions edit   Wikipedia's portals All Portals Overview Glossaries Indices Lists Outlines Categories Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Featured portals About portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=737901506" Categories: Technology portal Technology portals Technology Science portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages ???? ??????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? Bahasa Indonesia ????? ??????? Kurdî Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? Nederlands ??? ??????? Occitan ????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ?????? ??????? Suomi Svenska ????? Taqbaylit Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? ???? Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 5 September 2016, at 18:25. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Contents/Portals |||Portal:Contents/Portals From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia < Portal:Contents Jump to: navigation, search Contents Overview Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology edit  watch   Wikipedia's contents: Portals General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places    Health and fitness     History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences    People and self    Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences About portals · Portal directory · Portals category Shortcuts: P: P:CP WP:8 WP:PORT Portals complement main topics in Wikipedia, and expound upon topics by introducing the reader to key articles, images, and categories that further describe the subject and its related topics. Portals also assist in helping editors to find related projects and things they can do to improve Wikipedia, and provide a unique way to navigate Wikipedia topics. At present, there are 1491 portals. WikiProject Directory Regional Notice Boards You can also use the Special:Search box below to locate Portals and sub-pages. edit  watch   General reference   (see in all page types) Library and information science edit  watch   Culture and the arts   (see in all page types) Culture Language: Constructed languages (Esperanto), English Arts (Aesthetics) Literature: Books • Comics • Children's literature • French literature • Poetry • Writing Authors: Jane Austen • Charles Dickens • William Shakespeare • Oscar Wilde • Kazi Nazrul Islam Novels: Dragonlance, Harry Potter, Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy Fictional worlds: Discworld, James Bond, Middle-earth, Narnia, Oz, Fictional characters Performing arts Dance: Ballet Film: A Nightmare on Elm Street, Academy Award, Alien, Animation, Bollywood, Disney, Indiana Jones, Silent film, Star Wars Music: Music of Australia • Music of Canada  • Record production Styles: Alternative rock, Blues, Christian music, Classical guitar, Classical music, Country music, Electronic music, Eurovision, Guitar, Heavy metal (Christian metal), Hip hop, Indian classical music, Industrial music, Jazz, K-pop, Latin music, Marching band, Percussion, Piano, Pipe organ, Pop music, Progressive rock, Punk rock, Rock and Roll, Rock music, R&B and Soul Music Artists: AC/DC, AKB48, A. R. Rahman, Bryan Adams, Aerosmith, Christina Aguilera, Backstreet Boys, The Beach Boys, The Beatles, Justin Bieber, Björk, Brandy Norwood, Mariah Carey, Cher, Kelly Clarkson, The Clash, Miley Cyrus, Celine Dion, Dream Theater, Bob Dylan, Grateful Dead, Eminem, Fergie, Marvin Gaye, Girls Aloud, Green Day, Iron Maiden, The Jackson Family, Janet Jackson, Michael Jackson, The Kinks, Beyoncé, Lady Gaga, Avril Lavigne, Led Zeppelin, Linkin Park, Madonna, Miles Davis, Motörhead, Katy Perry, Pink Floyd, Powderfinger, Elvis Presley, Queen, Rihanna, The Rolling Stones, Sakis Rouvas, Rush, Santana, Britney Spears, The Supremes, Slipknot, Shania Twain, Shreya Ghoshal, U2, Usher, Rufus Wainwright, Neil Young, Frank Zappa, Shakira Opera: Gilbert & Sullivan Television: Australian television, BBC, The Big Bang Theory, Buffy the Vampire Slayer, Cartoon Network, Doctor Who, EastEnders, Ed, Edd n Eddy, Family Guy, Friends, Futurama, House, M.D., M*A*S*H, Millennium, Monty Python, Muppets, Nickelodeon, SpongeBob SquarePants, Star Trek, 24, The Simpsons, Sherlock Holmes Theatre: Musical theatre Visual arts: Portal:Anime and manga (Dragon Ball) • Architecture (Portal) • Cartoon • Computer graphics • Design • Graffiti • Origami • Photography • Studio Ghibli • Textile arts (Fashion, Knitting) • Typography Genre: Comedy • Furry • Horror fiction • King Arthur • Mythology • Pornography • Speculative fiction • Steampunk • Superhero fiction Recreation and Entertainment Food: Bacon Drink: Beer, Coffee, Liquor, Wine Sports: Asian Games · Association football (A-League, Football in Argentina, Association football variants, Football in Africa, Football in Germany, Football in India, English football, Soccer in the United States, Women's association football) • Athletics • Australian rules football • Badminton • Baseball • Basketball (College basketball, National Basketball Association) • Sport of Canada • Commonwealth Games • Cricket (Australian cricket team in England in 1948, Indian Premier League) • Cycling • Fencing • Figure skating • Fishing • Gridiron football (American football, Canadian football, College football, National Football League) • Golf • Gymnastics • Handball • Horse racing • Ice hockey • Martial arts (Karate) • Olympics • Paralympics • Professional wrestling • Racing (Motorsport: Formula One, NASCAR, Motorcycle racing) • Rock climbing • Rugby (Rugby league, Rugby union) • Sailing • Snooker • Tennis • Water sports (Swimming, Underwater diving)  • Women's sport Games: Amusement parks • Strategy games (Chess, Warhammer) • Role-playing games (Dungeons & Dragons) Video games: Final Fantasy • Halo • Mario • Massively multiplayer online games • Nintendo • PlayStation • Pokémon • Sega • SNK  • The Sims • Sonic the Hedgehog • Xbox • Zelda Hobbies, Crafts and Other: Gardening • Gemology and Jewelry • Home improvement • Numismatics • Philately • Radio • Scouting • Toys (Lego) edit  watch   Geography and places   (see in all page types) Geography (Atlas • Islands • Mountains) Africa Algeria • Angola • Benin • Botswana • Burkina Faso • Burundi • Cameroon • Cape Verde • Central African Republic • Chad • Côte d'Ivoire • Republic of the Congo • Democratic Republic of the Congo • Djibouti • Egypt • Eritrea • Ethiopia • Gabon • The Gambia • Ghana • Guinea • Guinea-Bissau • Kenya  (Mombasa, Nairobi) • Liberia • Libya • Madagascar • Malawi • Mali • Mauritania • Mauritius • Morocco • Mozambique • Namibia • Niger • Nigeria (Port Harcourt, Lagos)  • Rwanda • São Tomé and Príncipe • Senegal • Sierra Leone • Somalia • South Africa • South Sudan • Sudan • Tanzania • Togo • Tunisia • Uganda • Western Sahara • Zambia • Zimbabwe Antarctica • Arctic Asia Bhutan • Bangladesh • (Bengal, Chittagong, Dhaka) • Cambodia • China (Beijing, Hong Kong, Macau, Shanghai, Shenzhen, Tibet) • Taiwan • Himalaya region • India (Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal (Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Chandigarh, Chennai, Delhi, Hisar, Hyderabad, Kolkata, Kollam, Mumbai, Patna, Trichy, Udaipur, Jodhpur) • Indonesia • Japan (Osaka, Tokyo) • Kazakhstan • Korea (North Korea, South Korea, Seoul) • Kyrgyzstan • Malaysia • Mongolia • Nepal • Pakistan (Chitral, Karachi, Lahore, Jhelum, Islamabad, Sialkot) • Philippines (Bohol) • Punjab • SAARC • Singapore • Sri Lanka • Tajikistan • Thailand • Turkey • Vietnam Europe European Union Austria (Vienna, Tyrol) • Basque • Belgium (Brussels) • Bulgaria • Channel Islands • Corsica • Croatia • Czech Republic (Prague) • Denmark • Estonia • Finland • France (Paris, Lyon) • Germany (Baden-Württemberg • Bavaria • East Frisia • Hamburg • Lower Saxony • North Rhine-Westphalia • Saxony-Anhalt • Schleswig-Holstein) • Gibraltar • Greece (Macedonia) • Hungary (Budapest, Miskolc) • Ireland (Kilkenny) • Italy (Rome, Milan, Venice) • Latvia • Lithuania • Luxembourg • Malta • Netherlands • Poland • Portugal • Romania  (Bucharest) • Silesia • Slovakia • Slovenia • Spain (Galicia) • Sweden • United Kingdom (England (Bristol, Cornwall, Devon, Hertfordshire, Lincolnshire, London, Luton, Stamford, North West England (Cheshire, Cumbria, Greater Manchester, Merseyside, Yorkshire), Somerset, Wiltshire, South East England (East Sussex, Kent, Hampshire, Oxfordshire)) • Northern Ireland, Scotland, Wales) Albania (Tirana) • Andorra • Armenia • Azerbaijan • Belarus • Bosnia and Herzegovina • Catalan-speaking countries • Faroe Islands • Georgia • Iceland • Isle of Man • Kosovo • Republic of Macedonia • Moldova • Montenegro • Norway • Russia  (Chechnya, Moscow) • Serbia • Switzerland (Geneva) • Turkey • Ukraine (Crimea) • Vatican City Latin America and Caribbean Argentina (Buenos Aires • Rosario)  • Belize • Bermuda • Brazil • Bolivia • Chile (Pichilemu) • Colombia • Costa Rica • Cuba • Dominican Republic • Ecuador • El Salvador • Guatemala • Guyana • Haiti • Jamaica • Mexico • Nicaragua • Panama • Paraguay • Peru • Puerto Rico • Suriname • Trinidad and Tobago • Uruguay • Venezuela Places near you Middle East Afghanistan • Cyprus • Egypt • Iran (Tabaristan) • Iraq • Israel (Jerusalem) • Jordan • Kazakhstan • Kurdistan • Lebanon • Libya • Morocco • Oman • Palestine • Saudi Arabia • Syria • Tajikistan • Turkey • United Arab Emirates (Abu Dhabi) • Uzbekistan  North America Canada:  • Geography of Canada Alberta (Calgary, Edmonton) • British Columbia (Vancouver) • Manitoba • New Brunswick • Newfoundland and Labrador (St. John's) • Northwest Territories • Nova Scotia • Nunavut • Ontario (Eastern Ontario • Ottawa •Toronto • Hamilton) • Prince Edward Island  • Quebec (Montreal, Quebec City, Estrie, Laurentides, Saguenay–Lac-Saint-Jean) • Saskatchewan • Yukon Mexico  San Diego–Tijuana United States Alabama • Alaska • Arizona (Grand Canyon) • Arkansas • California (Greater Los Angeles • San Diego • San Diego–Tijuana, San Francisco Bay Area) • Colorado • Connecticut • Delaware • District of Columbia • Florida  (Jacksonville • Miami) • Georgia • Hawaii • Idaho • Illinois (Chicago) • Indiana (Indianapolis) • Iowa • Kansas • Kentucky (Louisville) • Louisiana (New Orleans) • Maine • Maryland • Massachusetts  (Boston) • Michigan (Detroit) • Minnesota • Mississippi • Missouri • Montana • Nebraska • Nevada (Las Vegas) • New England • New Hampshire • New Jersey • New Mexico • New York (New York City • Capital District • Finger Lakes • Hudson Valley • Syracuse) • North Carolina • North Dakota • Ohio (Cleveland) • Oklahoma • Oregon • Pennsylvania (Erie • Lancaster • Philadelphia • Pittsburgh) • Puerto Rico • Rhode Island • South Carolina • South Dakota • Tennessee • Texas (Austin • Dallas • Houston) • Utah • Vermont • Virginia • Washington (Seattle) • West Virginia • Wisconsin • Wyoming Oceania Australia Australian Capital Territory • New South Wales (City of Bankstown • Sydney) • Northern Territory • Queensland (Brisbane) • South Australia • Tasmania • Victoria (Melbourne) • Western Australia (Perth) Kiribati • Micronesia • New Zealand • Papua New Guinea • Tuvalu edit  watch   Health and fitness   (see in all page types) Health and fitness Medicine • Biology • Nursing • Dentistry • Food • Pharmacy and Pharmacology • Psychiatry • Pervasive developmental disorders • Complementary and Alternative Medicine • Sexuality • Viruses • Trauma & Orthopaedics • Sports edit  watch   History and events   (see in all page types) History American Old West • Ancient Egypt • Ancient Germanic Culture • Ancient Greece • Ancient Japan • Ancient Near East • Ancient Rome (Military of ancient Rome) • Anglo-Saxon England • Crown of Aragon • Archaeology • Ashura • Austria-Hungary • British Empire • Bulgarian Empire • Byzantine Empire • Classical Civilization • Colonialism • Disasters  • German Empire • Heraldry • History of Canada • History of the Latter Day Saint movement • History of Science • Indian independence movement • Khitan • Mesoamerica • Middle Ages • Nazi Germany • New France • Russian Empire • Sasanian Empire • Soviet Union  War:American Revolutionary War • American Civil War • Cold War • Italian Wars • Liberation War • Military history of France • Military history of Africa • Military history of the Ottoman Empire • Napoleonic Wars • September 11 attacks • Syrian civil war • World War I • World War II 1920s • 1930s • 1940s • 1950s • 1960s • 1970s • 1980s • 1990s • 2000s • 2010s Current events Sports Time Winter • Autumn Chronology edit  watch   Mathematics and logic   (see in all page types) Mathematics Algebra • Analysis • Category theory • Cryptography • Discrete mathematics • Geometry • Number theory • Topology Logic Set theory  Statistics  edit  watch   Natural and physical sciences   (see in all page types) Science History of Science • Philosophy of science • Systems science Biological science Agropedia • Amphibians and Reptiles • Animals • Arthropods • Astrobiology • Birds • Cats • Cetaceans • Crustaceans • Dinosaurs • Dogs • Ecology • Evolutionary biology • Extinct and Endangered Species • Fish • Forestry • Fungi • Gastropods • Horses • Insects  • Mammals • Marine life • Molecular Anthropology • Molecular and Cellular Biology (Metabolism, Gene wiki) • Neuroscience • Paleontology • Plants • Primates • Prehistoric mammals • Rabbits and hares • Sharks • Trees • Turtles • Viruses • Wildlife of Scotland • Wetlands Physical science Astronomy (Space, Solar System, Mars, Moon, Uranus, Jupiter, Star, X-ray astronomy)  Chemistry (Analytical chemistry, Organic chemistry, Physical chemistry, Crystallography)  Earth sciences (Atmospheric sciences, Earthquakes, Environment, Fire, Global warming, Tropical cyclones, Volcanoes and Volcanology, Weather, Water)  Physics (Cosmology, Gravitation, Electromagnetism) edit  watch   People and self   (see in all page types) Biography • Death • Human rights • Community • Gangs • Mind and brain • Thinking • Sexuality • LGBT • Serer • Transgender • Yoruba • Igbo edit  watch   Philosophy and thinking   (see in all page types) Philosophy Areas of philosophical inquiry Aesthetics • Epistemology • Ethics • Logic • Metaphysics • Mind and Brain (Thinking) • Philosophy of science • Social and political philosophy  Philosophies and ideologies Anarchism • Animal rights • Capitalism • Communism • Confucianism • Conservatism • Existentialism • Fascism • Liberalism • Libertarianism • Left-wing populism • Right-wing populism • Socialism • Taoism • Transhumanism edit  watch   Religion and belief systems   (see in all page types) Religion (Spirituality, Occult) Abrahamic religions Christianity Adventism • Anabaptism • Anglicanism • Arminianism • Baptist • Bible • Calvinism • Catholicism • Christadelphians • Christianity in China • Christianity in India • Eastern Christianity • Lutheranism • Methodism • Oriental Orthodoxy • Pope • Private revelation • Saints • Seventh-day Adventist Church Latter Day Saints Book of Mormon • LDS Church • Community of Christ Islam Shia Islam • Day Of Ashura • Ahmadiyyat • Qur'an • Islam in China • Sufism Judaism Kabbalah Creationism Non-Abrahamic religions Indian religions Ayyavazhi Buddhism Mahayana Buddhism • Tibetan Buddhism • Vajrayana Buddhism • Theravada Buddhism Gnosticism Hinduism Hindu Mythology  Jainism Digambara ?v?t?mbara Sikhism Religions and traditions with East Asian origin Chinese Folk Religion Confucianism • Shinto • Taoism • Falun Gong Religions with West Asian origin Zoroastrianism Bábism Bahá'í Faith New religions Scientology • Falun Gong  Theosophy Religions with European origin Heathenism Hellenismos Greek Mythology Wicca Traditional African religions African Serer Other Astrology • Mythology Non Religion or Belief Atheism • Nontheism edit  watch   Society and social sciences   (see in all page types) Social sciences Anthropology (Archaeology) • Economics • Education • Geography • History • Law • Linguistics • Psychology • Sociology Society Cooperatives • Disability • Discrimination • Economics and business  • Education (Schools, University, University of Cambridge, University of Oxford, University of Pittsburgh) • Environment • Ethnic groups: African American, Berbers, Celts, Hispanic and Latino Americans, Indigenous peoples of the Americas, Indigenous peoples of North America, Aboriginal Canadians •  Feminism • Folklore • Freedom of speech • Freemasonry • Gender studies • Genealogy • Globalization • Holidays • Hunger relief • Journalism • LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender) • (Transgender) • Men's rights • Social movements • Sustainable development • Terrorism • Transhumanism • Transnational child protection•Migrant Domestic Workers in Lebanon Law Criminal justice• Human rights • Law of England and Wales• Laws in India • Supreme Court of the United States Politics and Political science Anarchism • Animal rights • British politics • Capitalism • Communism • Canadian politics • Christian democracy • Conservatism • Fascism • Geert Wilders • India Government • Liberalism • Right-wing populism • International organizations: (United Nations  • NATO • SAARC) • Organized Labour • Pakistan Government • Philippine Presidency • Republican Party • U.S. Government (Barack Obama) • Donald Trump  • Social welfare and social work Military science Canadian Forces • Military of Greece • Military of Australia • Military of the United Kingdom (British Army • Royal Navy • Royal Air Force) • Military of the United States (United States Air Force • United States Army • United States Coast Guard • United States Marine Corps • United States Navy) • Tank • Half-track • War • Weapons of mass destruction edit  watch   Technology and applied sciences   (see in all page types) Technology Engineering • Agriculture and Agronomy  • Astronomy • Biotechnology • Bridges • Electronics (Telecommunication) • Mass surveillance • Energy (Renewable energy) • Forestry • Hazardous Materials • Infrastructure • Laser • Mining • Nanotechnology • Nuclear technology • Robotics Computing and Information technology Computer networking (Internet, IRC) • Computer programming (Python programming, Java) • Computer science (Artificial intelligence, Computer graphics) • Computer security (Cryptography) • Software (Free software, Linux) • Amiga  • Smartphone • Apple  • Google (Android) • Microsoft• Alphabet Transport Aviation • Bicycles/Cycling • Buses • Cars (Australian, Japanese) • Trucks • London Transport • Nautical (Lighthouses, UK Waterways) • Roads (Australian Roads, Canada Roads, U.S. Roads, California Roads, Maryland Roads, Michigan Highways, New York Roads, Washington Roads) • Spaceflight • Trains (North American railways, Railways in India, Sri Lanka Railways, UK Railways, Trams, UK Trams) Portals List Directory WikiProject Guidelines Instructions Categorizing (Portals category) Contents Overview Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Content listings Types Overviews Featured content Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories People deaths this year Timelines centuries decades Indices A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Wikipedia books What are portals? List of portals Shortcuts to this page: Portal:Categories • P:CAT Purge cache to show recent changes Shortcuts to this page: WP:PORT • P: Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Contents/Portals&oldid=746645444" Categories: Wikipedia navigation Content portals Portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Afrikaans Alemannisch ??????? Aragonés Arpetan ??????? ???? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Brezhoneg Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Frysk ??? ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Lëtzebuergesch Lumbaart Magyar ???? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? ????????? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Ripoarisch Român? ??????? Shqip Sicilianu ????? ???? Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ???? Vèneto Ti?ng Vi?t ?? Yorùbá ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 28 October 2016, at 17:20. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Stephen_Breyer_official_SCOTUS_portrait_crop.jpg |||File:Stephen Breyer official SCOTUS portrait crop.jpg From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this preview: 480 × 600 pixels. Other resolutions: 192 × 240 pixels | 384 × 480 pixels | 1,008 × 1,260 pixels. Original file ?(1,008 × 1,260 pixels, file size: 1.01 MB, MIME type: image/jpeg) This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary[edit] DescriptionStephen Breyer official SCOTUS portrait crop.jpg Official portrait of Supreme Court Justice Stephen Breyer. Date 2006 Source http://www.supremecourthistory.org/history/supremecourthistory_history_current_breyer.htm Author Steve Petteway, photographer for the US Supreme Court[1] Licensing[edit] Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work prepared by an officer or employee of the United States Government as part of that person’s official duties under the terms of Title 17, Chapter 1, Section 105 of the US Code. See Copyright. Note: This only applies to original works of the Federal Government and not to the work of any individual U.S. state, territory, commonwealth, county, municipality, or any other subdivision. This template also does not apply to postage stamp designs published by the United States Postal Service since 1978. (See § 313.6(C)(1) of Compendium of U.S. Copyright Office Practices). It also does not apply to certain US coins; see The US Mint Terms of Use. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law, including all related and neighboring rights. This file was reviewed on 29 September 2010 by the administrator or trusted user Jappalang (talk), who confirmed the Public Domain status on that date. Personality rightsPersonality rights warning Although this work is freely licensed or in the public domain, the person(s) shown may have rights that legally restrict certain re-uses unless those depicted consent to such uses. In these cases, a model release or other evidence of consent could protect you from infringement claims. Though not obliged to do so, the uploader may be able to help you to obtain such evidence. See our general disclaimer for more information. File history Click on a date/time to view the file as it appeared at that time. Date/Time Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 13:47, 10 August 2009 1,008 × 1,260 (1.01 MB) Gage {{Information |Description=Official portrait of Supreme Court Justice Stephen Breyer. |Source=http://www.supremecourthistory.org/02_history/subs_current/images_b/009.html |Date=2006 |Author=Collection of the Supreme Court of the United States, Photographe File usage More than 100 pages link to this file. The following list shows the first 100 page links to this file only. A full list is available. List of Jewish American politicians Supreme Court of the United States Talk:Main Page/Archive 34 User:4v4l0n42/Draft 6L User:4v4l0n42/Today User:Afterword User:Afterword/pretty User:AlMac User:Allard User:Bannus User:Brian/mainpage User:David Levy/Main2 User:David Levy/Test User:David Levy/Test2 User:Dbmag9/Main Page User:Drumguy8800/Main page draft User:ElAmericano/storage/mainpage1 User:Eloquence/Tour 01 User:Encephalon/Main User:FayssalF User:Getcrunk/Main Page Sandbox User:Go for it!/MP/nodiv User:Hemanshu/edmainpage User:Interiot/Main User:Jcrwiki~enwiki User:JonMoore/Main Page User:JustinWick/mydraft User:Kevin baas~enwiki/main page proposal User:Krik~enwiki/mp User:Krik~enwiki/nmp User:LEC20/Daily Diversions User:Lovelac7 User:Malomeat User:MarSch/Main body User:MarSch/Main page User:MattKingston User:Member/Wikipedia Front Page User:Mulad/portal User:Nickg331 User:NoSeptember/Main User:Node ue/MainPageTemplate2 User:Persian Poet Gal User:Porges/Main Page User:Quentin Smith/Shadow Main Page User:Ral315/Main Page User:RaptorX User:Siroxo/main page draft User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-22Jul User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-23Jul User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-24Jul User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-25Jul User:Somoza/Zero-Phonon User:Talrias/Main Page User:Tazmaniacs User:The bellman User:Thetorpedodog/xptablefree User:Tim Robinson/Main Page (Proposal) User:Tom-/Main Page CSS test User:Tom-/NS4 test User:Tom-/sandbox User:U-Two User:Vincent7 User:Zafiroblue05/Draft User talk:Guty~enwiki User talk:Kevin baas~enwiki/main page proposal Wikipedia:Main Page/French2 Wikipedia:Main Page/Temp10 Wikipedia:Main Page/Test Wikipedia:Main Page/test Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (Italian-style) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (Old PDA version) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (blue boy) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (editable) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (executive) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (misty breeze) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (regal) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (shades of blue) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (simple layout) Wikipedia:Today's featured article Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft/Draft 5 Archive Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft/Sj Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft/Test Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft2 Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft2 (fullsize text) Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft (Italian Inspired) Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft (current templates) Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft 0 Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft 6C Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft A Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft B Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft C Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft L Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft NOW Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft extra search box Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft extra search box2 Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft no search box Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/NOW Global file usage The following other wikis use this file: Usage on cs.wikipedia.org Nejvyšší soud Spojených stát? amerických Usage on de.wikipedia.org Liste der Richter am Obersten Gerichtshof der Vereinigten Staaten Usage on es.wikipedia.org Estados Unidos contra Lara Usage on fa.wikipedia.org ????? ??????????? ????? ???????? Usage on it.wikipedia.org Corte suprema degli Stati Uniti d'America Usage on ja.wikipedia.org ???????? Usage on ko.wikipedia.org ?? ?? ??? Usage on mr.wikipedia.org ????????? ???????? ???????? Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Suprema Corte dos Estados Unidos Usage on ru.wikipedia.org ????????? ??? ??? Usage on sh.wikipedia.org Vrhovni sud SAD Usage on sv.wikipedia.org USA:s högsta domstol Usage on tl.wikipedia.org Kataas-taasang Hukuman ng Estados Unidos Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Amerika Birle?ik Devletleri Yüksek Mahkemesi Usage on zh.wikipedia.org ?????? Metadata This file contains additional information, probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state, some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Orientation Normal Horizontal resolution 300 dpi Vertical resolution 300 dpi Software used Adobe Photoshop 7.0 File change date and time 08:52, 10 August 2009 Color space sRGB Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Stephen_Breyer_official_SCOTUS_portrait_crop.jpg" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces File Talk Variants Views Read View on Commons More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Upload file Special pages Page information Languages Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heffernan_v._City_of_Paterson |||Heffernan v. City of Paterson From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Heffernan v. City of Paterson Supreme Court of the United States Argued January 19, 2016 Decided April 26, 2016 Full case name Jeffrey Heffernan, Petitioner v. City of Paterson, et al. Docket nos. 14-1280 Citations 578 U.S. ___ (more) Opinion announcement Opinion announcement Prior history Jury finds in favor of the plaintiff, judge recuses for conflict of interest and case is retried; summary judgement in favor of the defense; Third Circuit reverses and remands; decision for the defense on remand; Third Circuit affirms Holding Police department's demotion of detective in response to mistaken belief he was supporting a challenger to the city's mayor in election violated his First Amendment rights regardless of his actual purpose. Judgement of the Third Circuit reversed and remanded. Court membership Chief Justice John G. Roberts Associate Justices Anthony Kennedy Clarence Thomas · Ruth Bader Ginsburg Stephen Breyer · Samuel Alito Sonia Sotomayor · Elena Kagan Case opinions Majority Breyer, joined by Roberts, Kennedy, Ginsburg, Sotomayor, Kagan Dissent Thomas, joined by Alito Laws applied U.S. Const. amend. I 42 U.S.C. § 1983 Heffernan v. City of Paterson, No. 14-1280, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in 2016 concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees. By a 6–2 margin, the Court held that a public employee's constitutional rights might be violated when an employer, believing that the employee was engaging in what would be protected speech, disciplines them because of that belief, even if the employee did not exercise such a constitutional right. The case was brought after Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey police force, went to a distribution center and picked up a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor in the 2005 election (Heffernan's mother had wanted a sign, so he was getting one for her). While Heffernan did not support the challenger, after other officers saw him with the sign they told senior officers, including the police chief, who strongly supported the mayor. For his apparent public support of the other candidate, they demoted Heffernan to beat patrol work as a uniformed officer. Heffernan brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his First Amendment rights. The case took a decade to reach the Supreme Court. For most of that time it was in federal district court, where it was heard by three different judges. A jury verdict in Heffernan's favor was set aside. A later summary judgment in the city's favor was overturned on appeal before being granted again in the third trial.[1] Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer stated that the department's belief was all that mattered, since the Court's precedent in this area holds it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee (who does not work under a contract that explicitly permits such discipline) for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion in which he was joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed, but his constitutional rights had not been violated. Contents 1 Legal background 2 Prior history 2.1 Original dispute 2.2 District court 2.3 Court of Appeals 2.4 Supreme Court 2.4.1 Oral arguments 3 Opinion of the Court 3.1 Dissent 4 Commentary 5 Aftermath 6 See also 7 References Legal background[edit] The First Amendment guarantees the rights of freedom of speech and peaceable assembly, among others. While not explicitly mentioned, the Supreme Court has held that the right to assembly includes the freedom of association, particularly political association.[2] These protections not only prohibit the government from passing laws which infringe upon these rights, but also from taking actions which would violate them. While the Bill of Rights—which includes the First Amendment—applied originally only to the federal government, the ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment allowed for the application of the Bill of Rights to the states under the incorporation doctrine.[3] In order to better protect these rights in the Reconstruction Era, Congress passed the Second Enforcement Act of 1871 at the request of President Ulysses S. Grant to better counter white supremacist organizations such as the Ku Klux Klan that were intimidating and suppressing voting by black citizens.[4] The act provided a remedy for those citizens who were deprived of their constitutional rights under the "color of any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage, of any State or Territory or the District of Columbia" and is currently codified at 42 U.S.C. § 1983.[5] With its decision in Monroe v. Pape (1961), the Court expanded the reach of section 1983 such that it is now used as a method of checking abuse by state officials who infringe upon constitutionally protected rights.[6][7] The First Amendment protects public employees from retaliation by their employer when speaking on matters of public concern.[8] In Pickering v. Board of Education (1968), the Court first articulated the right of public employees to be protected from dismissal for exercising their right to free speech. There, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of a teacher who was fired after writing a letter to a local newspaper critical of its handling of a recent bond issue.[9] Eight years later, this protection from dismissal was extended to cover partisan political ideology and affiliation in Elrod v. Burns.[8] But the Court has recognized that the "government as employer" has wider constitutional latitude in its decisions than the "government as sovereign".[10] In order to adequately delineate the limits of the government-as-employer's discretion, the Court developed a framework in Connick v. Myers (1983) known as the Connick test. It consists of elements. The first is the threshold a plaintiff must pass to state a claim: the plaintiff must show that they were speaking on a matter of public concern. The second falls to the employer: they must show that the harm to workplace efficiency outweighs the harm caused by infringing upon the right to free speech.[11] In Waters v. Churchill (1994), the Court was faced with two differing accounts of the speech at issue. The question presented to the Court was whether the Connick test ought be applied to what the employer thought was said or what was actually said. The case revolved around a nurse dismissed for a conversation she had with a coworker. There was a discrepancy between what she argued was said and what her employer thought was said. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, joined by a plurality of justices, opined that the Connick test must be applied to the speech the employer thought occurred, and on which it acted, rather than that which the finder of fact determines did occur.[12] Prior history[edit] Original dispute[edit] Downtown Paterson In 2005, Jeffrey Heffernan was a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey police. His supervisor and the chief of police were both appointed by the city's incumbent mayor, Jose Torres, who was being challenged by city councilman Lawrence Spagnola in that year's election. Heffernan was friendly with Spagnola, a former police chief,[1] and informally supported his campaign. He could not vote in the election as he did not live in the city.[13] At the request of his sick mother, who did live in the city, Heffernan while off-duty picked up a Spagnola lawn sign for her after her previous sign was stolen. Other officers saw him at the distribution location holding a sign and talking to Spagnola campaign staff. They soon notified superiors, and the next day officials demoted Heffernan from detective to patrol officer for his perceived "overt involvement" with the Spagnola campaign.[14] District court[edit] Heffernan sued the city, the mayor, and his superior officers under 42 U.S.C. §1983 in the federal District Court for New Jersey, claiming that his rights of freedom of speech as well as freedom of association had been violated.[15] Heffernan contended that while he had not actually engaged in any protected speech, the department acted on the belief that he had, and the department should not have demoted him on the basis of that erroneous belief.[14] In 2009, a jury found for Heffernan and awarded him damages from the police officials and the city. Despite the verdict, Heffernan sought a retrial because Judge Peter G. Sheridan had not allowed him to pursue the freedom of speech claim; the defense did so as well because Judge Sheridan had allowed the freedom of association claim. While considering these motions, Judge Sheridan became aware of a conflict of interest through a former law firm and set aside the verdict, setting a new date for trial before Judge Dennis M. Cavanaugh.[16] Judge Cavanaugh granted summary judgment to the defendants on the freedom of speech claim based on their earlier motions, holding that Heffernan had not engaged in protected speech so his rights could not have been violated. In 2012, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals reversed Judge Cavanaugh's ruling and remanded the case to him with instructions that he was to allow Heffernan to present his freedom of association claim and consider the facts from the jury trial when reconsidering the summary-judgment motions.[16] Judge Kevin McNulty heard the case on remand. After considering the parties' motions for summary judgment again, he ruled in the city's favor in 2014. Heffernan, he ruled, had not engaged in any protected speech or expressive conduct. Judge McNulty also ruled that Heffernan could not prevail on claims that his perceived speech was protected, per Ambrose v. Robinson Township, a previous case on that issue in the Third Circuit,[17] or that his actions were protected since they aided and abetted speech.[18] Judge McNulty also rejected similar claims for freedom of association. He decided that Dye v. Office of the Racing Commission, a case in which the Sixth Circuit had held that the First Amendment reached perceived political association,[19] was not a precedent he could rely on since Dye itself explicitly rejected Ambrose, and as a district judge he could not reject circuit precedent.[20] Court of Appeals[edit] On appeal to the Third Circuit, a three-judge panel of Judge Robert Cowen, Judge Morton Ira Greenberg and Judge Thomas I. Vanaskie unanimously held for the city.[1] In a decision issued in 2015, Judge Vanaskie, writing for the Court, reiterated Judge McNulty's finding that Heffernan's actions in picking up the sign for his mother did not constitute protected speech or association. He distinguished the case at hand from the Sixth Circuit's ruling in Dye by noting that in that case, the employers had inferred the employees' intent from their non-participation in partisan politics rather than an actual action they had taken, as had occurred in Heffernan's case.[1] Judge Vanaskie instead found guidance from the Supreme Court's 1994 holding in Waters v. Churchill, in which it had upheld an Illinois public hospital's dismissal of a nurse for her comments about a supervisor to a colleague, despite an ongoing factual dispute about the substance of those comments. The Court found that the hospital administration had made a reasonable attempt to investigate what the nurse had said before firing her. In that case, the Court had said explicitly that disciplining employees for things they did not actually do did not rise to the level of a constitutional violation.[1] Supreme Court[edit] Following the Third Circuit's decision, Heffernan petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari, requesting they hear the case. After the Court considered both Heffernan's petition and the city's reply, it granted the petition on the first day of the 2015 term. Both parties consented to the filing of amicus curiae briefs by uninvolved parties who believed they had a stake in the outcome of the case. The National Association of Government Employees, Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, and Thomas Jefferson Center for the Protection of Free Expression filed amicus briefs in support of Heffernan, while the New Jersey State League of Municipalities and the National Conference of State Legislatures filed briefs in support of the City of Paterson.[21] The United States government also filed an amicus brief in support of Heffernan, as well as a motion to appear at oral argument, which the Court granted, meaning the Solicitor General's office would be appearing at oral arguments, held on January 19, 2016.[22] Oral arguments[edit] External video Heffernan v. City of Paterson Oral Argument, C-SPAN[23] Mark Frost, arguing for petitioner Jeffrey Heffernan, was immediately met with questions from the justices: Anthony Kennedy asked for clarification on the particular right to be protected, and Antonin Scalia, Samuel Alito and Chief Justice John Roberts all questioned him about whether his rights could be infringed if he was not actually engaged in any speech.[24] Justice Scalia (who died before the decision was announced) argued that there was "no constitutional right not to be fired for the wrong reason."[25] Frost responded that the motives of the government, rather than the actions of the individual, were important in this case. Assistant to the Solicitor General Ginger Anders, arguing on behalf of the United States as amicus curiae in favor of Heffernan, continued this argument, stating that there is "a First Amendment right not to have adverse action taken against him by his employer for the unconstitutional purpose of suppressing disfavored political beliefs."[25] Arguing for respondents, Thomas Goldstein distinguished between political neutrality and political apathy. He argued that the First Amendment protects political neutrality, the conscious choice to not take a position, but does not protect political apathy, when a person simply does not care and makes no particular choice to be neutral.[24] As Heffernan claimed that he had no affiliation with Spagnola, the respondents argued that Heffernan's actions constitute unprotected apathy rather than a conscious choice of neutrality.[26] Justice Elena Kagan questioned Goldstein as to the purpose of the First Amendment saying, "the idea has to do with why the government acted" to which he responded, "It's called an individual right, not a government wrong."[25] Frost took a rebuttal to respond to Goldstein's distinction between political neutrality and apathy, arguing that there is little distinction as the government is acting for impermissible reasons in both cases.[24] Opinion of the Court[edit] Justice Stephen Breyer delivered the opinion of the Court. In a 6–2 decision authored by Justice Stephen Breyer, the Court reversed the ruling of the lower court and ruled that the employer's motive is material to First Amendment challenges. Citing Waters v. Churchill, Justice Breyer wrote, [W]e conclude that, as in Waters, the government's reason for demoting Heffernan is what counts here. When an employer demotes an employee out of a desire to prevent the employee from engaging in political activity that the First Amendment protects, the employee is entitled to challenge that unlawful action under the First Amendment ... —even if, as here, the employer makes a factual mistake about the employee's behavior.[27] The Court remanded the case to the Third Circuit and made clear in its opinion that, while it is impermissible to retaliate based upon perceived protected speech, the lower courts should take into consideration whether Heffernan was disciplined for violating any different and neutral policies.[28] The majority provided three main arguments in support of its reasoning: that their interpretation is more in line with the text of the First Amendment, that it better served the First Amendment's purpose of limiting political patronage, and that such an interpretation will not significantly burden employers.[29] Justice Breyer argued that unlike the Fourteenth Amendment, which focuses on the rights of the people, the First Amendment focuses on the actions of the government when it says, "Congress shall make no law ... abridging the freedom of speech."[30] As the text of the amendment focuses on the government's abilities to make laws, it is the government's actions and motives, not the actual actions of citizens, which are proscribed by the Amendment. While the policy at issue was not a law of Congress, the actions were still that of a government official that infringed upon rights guaranteed by the First Amendment.[27] The Court supported this interpretation by recognizing that the First Amendment sought to prevent government actions from discouraging protected activity.[31] Citing Branti v. Finkel, the Court pointed out that precedent never required plaintiffs in political affiliation cases to show change in allegiance to be successful, and similarly extended that logic to this case: the potential chilling effect on constitutionally protected speech still exists, regardless of the factual basis of the employer's reasoning.[32] Because employees thinking of engaging in protected activity will be equally dissuaded by an incorrect dismissal as by a correct dismissal, both reasonings should be considered in violation of the First Amendment.[33] Respondents argued that finding employers liable for factual mistakes would place substantial costs upon employers.[33] The Court rejected this argument, saying that an employee would still need to prove the employer acted out of an improper motive. Referring to Heffernan's case and those like it, the Court said that "the employee will, if anything, find it more difficult to prove that motive, for the employee will have to point to more than his own conduct to show an employer's intent".[33] Dissent[edit] Justice Thomas authored the dissent. Justice Clarence Thomas authored the dissent, in which Justice Samuel Alito joined. Justice Thomas argued that the previous ruling should have been upheld "because federal law does not provide a cause of action to plaintiffs whose constitutional rights have not been violated".[34] The dissent focused on the text of the statute Heffernan was suing under: 42 U.S.C. § 1983. The statute provides a cause of action only for those whose rights have actually been violated by the government. Because Heffernan maintained that he had not been exercising his First Amendment rights, the dissent argued that those rights could not have been violated, and that a section 1983 claim requires that the employee engage in protected activity and that the employer retaliate against that activity.[35] The dissent argued that, for a section 1983 claim to be valid, "harm alone is not enough; it has to be the right kind of harm."[36] Thomas provided an example of a law allowing police to pull over any driver without cause. This would obviously violate the Fourth Amendment rights of anyone stopped, but people stuck in traffic who were injured by the collateral damage of unconstitutional actions would not be able to sue because none of their rights was violated. Similarly, it is not enough for Heffernan to have shown injury but violation of an actual right as well. For the dissent, even if the dismissal was for the wrong reason and harm was suffered, the dismissal cannot infringe upon rights he never exercised.[37] Further supporting their argument, the dissent cited Monterey v. Del Monte Dunes at Monterey, Ltd. to argue that a Section 1983 claim falls under tort law, in order to draw a distinction between how attempts are handled under tort and criminal law. Under criminal law, a factually impossible attempt to commit a crime, such as trying to steal from an empty pocket or defraud someone with no money, can still be tried as an attempt. No such doctrine exists in tort law. Because Heffernan was not engaged in protected activity, the police department could only have attempted to deprive him of his right, so his suit must fail because "there are no attempted torts."[38] Commentary[edit] The day after oral arguments, writer Gilad Edelman criticized the Court's assumption that Heffernan never exercised his First Amendment rights, saying, "the Supreme Court may miss an opportunity to make sure that cases like his really are rare."[39] Edelman interpreted Heffernan's actions as being well within the existing First Amendment precedent. Though Heffernan was not necessarily supporting the candidate, he was talking and associating with people connected to the candidate, actions already protected under existing precedent. Edelman suggested that, regardless of whether or not Heffernan intended to be identified as supporting the campaign, he was still punished by the city for associating.[39] Soon after the ruling was announced, the decision was largely praised. Jonathan Stahl, a writer at the Constitution Daily, said that "[t]he potential impact of this case on our understanding of the First Amendment is notable."[40] Similarly, The Economist called it "good law" and a "significant development" for expanding the existing jurisprudence to perceived speech, not just actual speech.[41] Aftermath[edit] Subsequent to the Supreme Court's ruling, the City of Paterson approved a $1.6 million settlement payout to Heffernan. The final payment of the settlement is due on September 30, 2017.[42] See also[edit] Freedom of speech portal New Jersey portal Supreme Court of the United States portal US labor law Spoils system 2015 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 578 References[edit] ^ a b c d e Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 777 F.3d 147, 149 (3rd Cir., 2015). Hereafter distinguished as Heffernan III. ^ NAACP v. Alabama, 357 U.S. 499 (1958). ^ Incorporation Doctrine, Cornell University Law School, (last visited June 20, 2016). ^ Allen Trelease, White Terror: The Ku Klux Klan Conspiracy and Southern Reconstruction 387-388 (1971). ^ 42 U.S.C. § 1983. ^ Karen M. Blum & Kathryn R. Urbonya, Section 1983 Litigation (1998) ^ Monroe v. Pape, 365 U.S. 167 (1961). ^ a b Elrod v. Burns, 427 U.S. 347 (1976). ^ Pickering v. Board of Education, 391 U.S. 563 (1968). ^ Waters v. Churchill, 511 U.S. 661, 671 (1994). ^ David Hudson, Balancing Act: Public Employees and Free Speech, 3 First Reports 23 (2002). ^ Waters v. Churchill, at 679–681. ^ Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 2 F.Supp.3d 563, 566 (D.N.J., 2014). Hereafter distinguished as Heffernan II. ^ a b Heffernan v. City of Paterson, No. 14-1280, 578 U.S. ___, slip op. at 2 (2016). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 2–3. ^ a b Heffernan II, at 568 (citing the earlier 2012 decision). ^ Ambrose v. Robinson Township, 303 F. 3d 488 (3rd Cir., 2002). ^ Heffernan II, 570–76. ^ Dye v. Office of the Racing Commission, 702 F.3d 286 (6th Cir. 2012). ^ Heffernan II, 579–581. ^ Amicus curiae briefs in support of petitioners: Brief for the National Association of Government Employees as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Nov. 16, 2015). Brief for the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Nov. 23, 2015). Brief for the Thomas Jefferson Center for the Protection of Free Expression, et al. as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Nov. 23, 2015). Amicus briefs in support of respondents: Brief for the New Jersey State League of Municipalities as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Dec. 23, 2015). Brief for the National Conference of State Legislatures, et al. as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Dec. 23, 2015). ^ No. 14-1280, United States Supreme Court (Apr. 29, 2016). ^ "Heffernan v. City of Paterson Oral Argument". C-SPAN. January 19, 2016. Retrieved April 19, 2017.  ^ a b c Howard Wasserman, Argument analysis: The First Amendment, political inactivity, and improper government motive, SCOTUSblog (Jan. 20, 2016). ^ a b c Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 578 U.S. ___ (2016) (Oral Arguments). ^ Transcript of Oral Argument at 31, Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 578 US ___ (2016) ^ a b Heffernan, slip op. at 6. ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 8. ^ Howard Wasserman, Opinion analysis: Improper motive can violate the First Amendment, even with a factual mistake, SCOTUSblog (Apr. 26, 2016). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6 (citing U.S. Const. amend. I) (internal quotations omitted). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6–7 ("The constitutional harm at issue in the ordinary [free speech] case consists in large part of discouraging employees—both the employee discharged (or demoted) and his or her colleagues—from engaging in protected activities."). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6–7 (citing Branti v. Finkel, 445 U.S. 507, 517). ^ a b c Heffernan, slip op. at 7. ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 1 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 2–4 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 5 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 4 (Thomas, J., dissenting) citing United States v. Stefonek, 179 F. 3d (7th Cir. 1999). . ^ a b Gilad Edelman, Heffernan v. Paterson and an Absurd First Amendment Doctrine, The New Yorker (Jan. 20, 2016). ^ Jonathan Stahl, Supreme Court rules on political speech and the First Amendment, National Constitution Center (Apr. 29, 2016). ^ S. M., Why freedom of speech might protect you when you aren't speaking, The Economist (Apr. 29, 2016). ^ Malinconico, Joe (October 19, 2016). "In a reversal, Paterson council OKs $1.6M settlement lawsuit that went to U.S. Supreme Court". North Jersey.com. Retrieved April 25, 2017.  v t e United States First Amendment case law Establishment Clause Public funding Everson v. Board of Education (1947) McCollum v. Board of Education (1948) Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York (1970) Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971) Tilton v. Richardson (1971) Committee for Public Education & Religious Liberty v. Nyquist (1973) Sloan v. Lemon (1973) Wolman v. Walter (1977) Marsh v. Chambers (1983) Mueller v. Allen (1983) Aguilar v. Felton (1985) Board of Education of Kiryas Joel Village School District v. Grumet (1994) Agostini v. Felton (1997) Mitchell v. Helms (2000) Zelman v. Simmons-Harris (2002) Locke v. Davey (2004) Arizona Christian School Tuition Organization v. Winn (2011) Public displays Stone v. Graham (1980) Lynch v. Donnelly (1984) Board of Trustees of Scarsdale v. McCreary (1985) County of Allegheny v. ACLU (1989) McCreary County v. ACLU of Kentucky (2005) Van Orden v. Perry (2005) Pleasant Grove City v. Summum (2009) School prayer Zorach v. Clauson (1952) Engel v. Vitale (1962) Abington School District v. Schempp (1963) Stone v. Graham (1980) Wallace v. Jaffree (1985) Lee v. Weisman (1992) Santa Fe Independent School District v. Doe (2000) Elk Grove Unified School District v. Newdow (2004) Creationism Epperson v. Arkansas (1968) Edwards v. Aguillard (1987) Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District (M.D. Pa. 2005) Legislature prayer Marsh v. Chambers (1983) Town of Greece v. Galloway (2014) Establishment Clause, Other McGowan v. Maryland (1961) Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York (1970) McDaniel v. Paty (1978) Widmar v. Vincent (1981) Larkin v. Grendel's Den, Inc. (1982) Estate of Thornton v. Caldor, Inc. (1985) Texas Monthly, Inc. v. Bullock (1989) Free Exercise Clause Vidal v. Girard's Executors (1844) Reynolds v. United States (1879) Davis v. Beason (1890) Schneider v. New Jersey (1939) Cantwell v. Connecticut (1940) Minersville School District v. Gobitis (1940) Murdock v. Pennsylvania (1943) United State v. Ballard (1944) Braunfeld v. Brown (1961) Torcaso v. Watkins (1961) Sherbert v. Verner (1963) Presbyterian Church v. Hull Church (1969) Wisconsin v. Yoder (1972) NLRB v. Catholic Bishop of Chicago (1979) Harris v. McRae (1980) Thomas v. Review Board of the Indiana Employment Security Division (1981) United States v. Lee (1982) Bob Jones University v. United States (1983) Bowen v. Roy (1986) Goldman v. Weinberger (1986) Employment Division v. Smith (1990) Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah (1993) City of Boerne v. Flores (1997) Watchtower Society v. Village of Stratton (2002) Cutter v. Wilkinson (2005) Gonzales v. UDV (2006) Freedom of speech (portal) Sedition and imminent danger Alien and Sedition Acts (1798) Masses Publishing Co. v. Patten (S.D.N.Y. 1917) Schenck v. United States (1919) Abrams v. United States (1919) Gitlow v. New York (1925) Whitney v. California (1927) Dennis v. United States (1951) Communist Party v. Subversive Activities Control Board (1955, 1961) Yates v. United States (1957) Bond v. Floyd (1966) Brandenburg v. Ohio (1969) False speech Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc. (1974) United States v. Alvarez (2012) Fighting words and the heckler's veto Cantwell v. Connecticut (1940) Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire (1942) Terminiello v. Chicago (1949) Feiner v. New York (1951) Gregory v. Chicago (1969) National Socialist Party of America v. Village of Skokie (1977) R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul (1992) Snyder v. Phelps (2011) Elonis v. United States (2015) Freedom of assembly and public forums Hague v. CIO (1939) Schneider v. New Jersey (1939) Martin v. Struthers (1943) Marsh v. Alabama (1946) Niemotko v. Maryland (1951) Edwards v. South Carolina (1963) Cox v. Louisiana (1965) Brown v. Louisiana (1966) Adderley v. Florida (1966) Carroll v. Town of Princess Anne (1968) Coates v. Cincinnati (1971) Organization for a Better Austin v. Keefe (1971) Lloyd Corp. v. Tanner (1972) Pruneyard Shopping Center v. Robins (1980) Widmar v. Vincent (1981) Hill v. Colorado (2000) McCullen v. Coakley (2014) Symbolic speech Stromberg v. California (1931) United States v. O'Brien (1968) Cohen v. California (1971) Smith v. Goguen (1974) Texas v. Johnson (1989) United States v. Eichman (1990) Virginia v. Black (2003) Compelled speech Minersville School District v. Gobitis (1940) West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette (1943) Wooley v. Maynard (1977) Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System v. Southworth (2000) Davenport v. Washington Education Association (2007) Knox v. Service Employees International Union, Local 1000 (2012) Agency for International Development v. Alliance for Open Society International, Inc. (2013) Loyalty oaths American Communications Association v. Douds (1950) Garner v. Board of Public Works (1951) Speiser v. Randall (1958) Keyishian v. Board of Regents (1965) Communist Party of Indiana v. Whitcomb (1974) School speech Minersville School District v. Gobitis (1940) West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette (1943) Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District (1969) Island Trees School District v. Pico (1982) Bethel School District v. Fraser (1986) Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier (1988) Rosenberger v. University of Virginia (1995) Morse v. Frederick (2007) Obscenity Rosen v. United States (1896) United States v. One Book Called Ulysses (S.D.N.Y. 1933) Roth v. United States (1957) One, Inc. v. Olesen (1958) Marcus v. Search Warrant (1961) MANual Enterprises v. Day (1962) Jacobellis v. Ohio (1964) Quantity of Books v. Kansas (1964) Freedman v. Maryland (1965) Memoirs v. Massachusetts (1966) Redrup v. New York (1967) Ginsberg v. New York (1968) Stanley v. Georgia (1969) Cohen v. California (1971) United States v. Thirty-seven Photographs (1971) Kois v. Wisconsin (1972) Miller v. California (1973) Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton (1973) United States v. 12 200-ft. Reels of Film (1973) Jenkins v. Georgia (1974) Erznoznik v. City of Jacksonville (1975) Young v. American Mini Theatres (1976) New York v. Ferber (1982) American Booksellers v. Hudnut (7th Cir., 1985) Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc. (1986) Osborne v. Ohio (1990) United States v. X-Citement Video (1994) Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union (1997) United States v. Playboy Entertainment Group (2000) Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition (2002) Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union (2002) Nitke v. Gonzales (S.D.N.Y., 2005) United States v. Williams (2008) FCC v. Fox Televisions Stations - 2 cases (2009 and 2012) American Booksellers Foundation for Free Expression v. Strickland (6th Cir., 2009) United States v. Kilbride (9th Cir., 2009) United States v. Stevens (2010) Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association (2011) Public employees Pickering v. Board of Education (1968) Perry v. Sindermann (1972) Board of Regents of State Colleges v. Roth (1972) Mt. Healthy City School District Board of Education v. Doyle (1977) Givhan v. Western Line Consolidated School District (1979) Connick v. Myers (1983) Rankin v. McPherson (1987) Waters v. Churchill (1994) Garcetti v. Ceballos (2006) Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri (2011) Heffernan v. City of Paterson (2016) Hatch Act and similar laws Ex parte Curtis (1882) United Public Workers v. Mitchell (1947) United States Civil Service Commission v. National Association of Letter Carriers (1973) Broadrick v. Oklahoma (1973) Licensing and restriction of speech Mutual Film Corporation v. Industrial Commission of Ohio (1915) Joseph Burstyn, Inc. v. Wilson (1952) Freedman v. Maryland (1965) Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council (1976) Hoffman Estates v. The Flipside, Hoffman Estates, Inc. (1982) Walker v. Texas Division, Sons of Confederate Veterans (2015) Commercial speech Valentine v. Chrestensen (1942) Rowan v. U.S. Post Office Dept. (1970) Pittsburgh Press Co. v. Pittsburgh Commission on Human Relations (1973) Bigelow v. Commonwealth of Virginia (1974) Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council (1976) Bates v. State Bar of Arizona (1977) Linmark Associates, Inc. v. Willingboro (1977) Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Ass’n (1978) Friedman v. Rogers (1979) Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission (1980) Consol. Edison Co. v. Public Serv. Comm'n (1980) Bolger v. Youngs Drug Products (1983) Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel (1985) Pacific Gas & Electric Co. v. Public Utilities Commission of California (1986) Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto Rico (1986) San Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic Committee (1987) 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island (1996) Sorrell v. IMS Health Inc. (2011) Campaign finance and political speech Buckley v. Valeo (1976) First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti (1978) Citizens Against Rent Control v. City of Berkeley (1981) California Medical Association v. FEC (1981) Brown v. Socialist Workers '74 Campaign Committee (1982) Regan v. Taxation with Representation of Washington (1983) FEC v. National Conservative Political Action Committee (1985) FEC v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life (1986) Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce (1990) McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Commission (1995) Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Committee v. FEC (1996) Nixon v. Shrink Missouri Government PAC (2000) FEC v. Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Committee (2001) Republican Party of Minnesota v. White (2002) McConnell v. FEC (2003) FEC v. Beaumont (2003) Randall v. Sorrell (2006) FEC v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc. (2007) Davis v. FEC (2008) Citizens United v. FEC (2010) McComish v. Bennett (2011) American Tradition Partnership v. Bullock (2012) McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission (2014) Williams-Yulee v. The Florida Bar (2015) Freedom of the press Prior restraints and censorship Near v. Minnesota (1931) Lovell v. City of Griffin (1938) Hannegan v. Esquire (1946) New York Times Co. v. United States (1971) Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo (1974) Nebraska Press Assn. v. Stuart (1976) Tory v. Cochran (2005) Privacy Time, Inc. v. Hill (1967) Cox Broadcasting Corp. v. Cohn (1975) Florida Star v. B. J. F. (1989) Taxation and privileges Grosjean v. American Press Co. (1936) Branzburg v. Hayes (1972) Minneapolis Star Tribune Company v. Commissioner (1983) Defamation Beauharnais v. Illinois (1952) New York Times Co. v. Sullivan (1964) Curtis Publishing Co. v. Butts (1967) Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc. (1974) Time, Inc. v. Firestone (1976) Bose Corp. v. Consumers Union of United States, Inc. (1984) Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc. (1985) McDonald v. Smith (1985) Hustler Magazine v. Falwell (1988) Harte-Hanks Communications v. Connaughton (1989) Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co. (1990) Obsidian Finance Group, LLC v. Cox (9th Cir., 2014) Broadcast media Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC (1969) FCC v. Pacifica Foundation (1978) Turner Broadcasting v. FCC (1994) Bartnicki v. Vopper (2001) Freedom of association Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee v. McGrath (1951) Watkins v. United States (1957) NAACP v. Alabama (1958) Baggett v. Bullitt (1964) In re Primus (1978) Roberts v. United States Jaycees (1984) Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, & Bisexual Group of Boston (1995) Boy Scouts of America v. Dale (2000) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Heffernan_v._City_of_Paterson&oldid=777385770" Categories: United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court United States First Amendment case law United States public employment case law 2016 in United States case law Hidden categories: Featured articles Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Add links This page was last modified on 26 April 2017, at 21:31. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page |||Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 5,393,689 articles in English Arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From today's featured article Stephen Breyer Heffernan v. City of Paterson was a U.S. Supreme Court case concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees, decided on April 26, 2016. Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey, police force, was seen with a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor. Heffernan's supervisors mistakenly thought that he was actively supporting the challenger and demoted him. He brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his right to free speech. Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer (pictured) cited the Court's precedents, which had held that it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not actually engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed but not that his constitutional rights had been violated. (Full article...) Recently featured: George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore "The Shape of Things to Come" (Lost) Shakespeare authorship question Archive By email More featured articles... Did you know... Unita Blackwell ... that civil rights activist Unita Blackwell (pictured) was the first African-American woman to be elected mayor in the state of Mississippi? ... that soldiers lined up on the sinking British troopship SS Tyndareus began to sing "It's a Long Way to Tipperary" while waiting for orders? ... that many reviewers compared the superhero comic Ultra to the television series Sex and the City? ... that the recently named fossil egg Suchoolithus dates to the Late Jurassic, making it tied for the oldest-known crocodylomorph egg? ... that the film The Brainwashing of My Dad received funding from Kickstarter? ... that the term elastance, the inverse of capacitance, was coined by Oliver Heaviside to promote an analogy of a capacitor as a spring rather than a container of charge? ... that "Christ ist erstanden", an old German hymn mentioned as early as the 12th century, was set for choir in the 21st century? ... that despite topping his class at Sandhurst, John Gellibrand found the prospects for promotion in the British Army so bleak that he resigned his commission and moved to Tasmania to grow apples? Recent additions Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru In the London Marathon, Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru (pictured) win the women's and men's races, respectively. A Taliban attack on an Afghan National Army base kills 140 soldiers. Turkey votes in a constitutional referendum in favour of replacing its parliamentary system of government with an executive presidency. A suicide bombing of civilian evacuation buses near Aleppo, Syria, kills more than 120 people, including at least 80 children. Emma Morano, the last known living person born before 1900, dies at the age of 117. Ongoing: Battle of Mosul Recent deaths: Erin Moran Michele Scarponi Ugo Ehiogu Aaron Hernandez On this day... April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries Today's featured picture The Storm is a painting by French artist Pierre Auguste Cot completed in 1880. Currently on display at New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art, it was commissioned by Catharine Lorillard Wolfe. Suggested inspirations have included the Greek romance Daphnis and Chloe by Longus as well as the romantic tale Paul et Virginie by Bernardin de Saint-Pierre. Painting: Pierre Auguste Cot Recently featured: Charolais bull Jesse B. Jackson Dynjandi Archive More featured pictures... Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning materials and activities Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 5,393,689 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=762066868" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Main Page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Languages ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Galego ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Român? ??????? Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? This page was last modified on 26 January 2017, at 12:39. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page#mw-head |||Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 5,393,689 articles in English Arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From today's featured article Stephen Breyer Heffernan v. City of Paterson was a U.S. Supreme Court case concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees, decided on April 26, 2016. Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey, police force, was seen with a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor. Heffernan's supervisors mistakenly thought that he was actively supporting the challenger and demoted him. He brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his right to free speech. Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer (pictured) cited the Court's precedents, which had held that it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not actually engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed but not that his constitutional rights had been violated. (Full article...) Recently featured: George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore "The Shape of Things to Come" (Lost) Shakespeare authorship question Archive By email More featured articles... Did you know... Unita Blackwell ... that civil rights activist Unita Blackwell (pictured) was the first African-American woman to be elected mayor in the state of Mississippi? ... that soldiers lined up on the sinking British troopship SS Tyndareus began to sing "It's a Long Way to Tipperary" while waiting for orders? ... that many reviewers compared the superhero comic Ultra to the television series Sex and the City? ... that the recently named fossil egg Suchoolithus dates to the Late Jurassic, making it tied for the oldest-known crocodylomorph egg? ... that the film The Brainwashing of My Dad received funding from Kickstarter? ... that the term elastance, the inverse of capacitance, was coined by Oliver Heaviside to promote an analogy of a capacitor as a spring rather than a container of charge? ... that "Christ ist erstanden", an old German hymn mentioned as early as the 12th century, was set for choir in the 21st century? ... that despite topping his class at Sandhurst, John Gellibrand found the prospects for promotion in the British Army so bleak that he resigned his commission and moved to Tasmania to grow apples? Recent additions Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru In the London Marathon, Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru (pictured) win the women's and men's races, respectively. A Taliban attack on an Afghan National Army base kills 140 soldiers. Turkey votes in a constitutional referendum in favour of replacing its parliamentary system of government with an executive presidency. A suicide bombing of civilian evacuation buses near Aleppo, Syria, kills more than 120 people, including at least 80 children. Emma Morano, the last known living person born before 1900, dies at the age of 117. Ongoing: Battle of Mosul Recent deaths: Erin Moran Michele Scarponi Ugo Ehiogu Aaron Hernandez On this day... April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries Today's featured picture The Storm is a painting by French artist Pierre Auguste Cot completed in 1880. Currently on display at New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art, it was commissioned by Catharine Lorillard Wolfe. Suggested inspirations have included the Greek romance Daphnis and Chloe by Longus as well as the romantic tale Paul et Virginie by Bernardin de Saint-Pierre. Painting: Pierre Auguste Cot Recently featured: Charolais bull Jesse B. Jackson Dynjandi Archive More featured pictures... Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning materials and activities Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 5,393,689 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=762066868" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Main Page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Languages ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Galego ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Român? ??????? Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? This page was last modified on 26 January 2017, at 12:39. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page#p-search |||Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 5,393,689 articles in English Arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From today's featured article Stephen Breyer Heffernan v. City of Paterson was a U.S. Supreme Court case concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees, decided on April 26, 2016. Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey, police force, was seen with a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor. Heffernan's supervisors mistakenly thought that he was actively supporting the challenger and demoted him. He brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his right to free speech. Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer (pictured) cited the Court's precedents, which had held that it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not actually engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed but not that his constitutional rights had been violated. (Full article...) Recently featured: George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore "The Shape of Things to Come" (Lost) Shakespeare authorship question Archive By email More featured articles... Did you know... Unita Blackwell ... that civil rights activist Unita Blackwell (pictured) was the first African-American woman to be elected mayor in the state of Mississippi? ... that soldiers lined up on the sinking British troopship SS Tyndareus began to sing "It's a Long Way to Tipperary" while waiting for orders? ... that many reviewers compared the superhero comic Ultra to the television series Sex and the City? ... that the recently named fossil egg Suchoolithus dates to the Late Jurassic, making it tied for the oldest-known crocodylomorph egg? ... that the film The Brainwashing of My Dad received funding from Kickstarter? ... that the term elastance, the inverse of capacitance, was coined by Oliver Heaviside to promote an analogy of a capacitor as a spring rather than a container of charge? ... that "Christ ist erstanden", an old German hymn mentioned as early as the 12th century, was set for choir in the 21st century? ... that despite topping his class at Sandhurst, John Gellibrand found the prospects for promotion in the British Army so bleak that he resigned his commission and moved to Tasmania to grow apples? Recent additions Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru In the London Marathon, Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru (pictured) win the women's and men's races, respectively. A Taliban attack on an Afghan National Army base kills 140 soldiers. Turkey votes in a constitutional referendum in favour of replacing its parliamentary system of government with an executive presidency. A suicide bombing of civilian evacuation buses near Aleppo, Syria, kills more than 120 people, including at least 80 children. Emma Morano, the last known living person born before 1900, dies at the age of 117. Ongoing: Battle of Mosul Recent deaths: Erin Moran Michele Scarponi Ugo Ehiogu Aaron Hernandez On this day... April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries Today's featured picture The Storm is a painting by French artist Pierre Auguste Cot completed in 1880. Currently on display at New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art, it was commissioned by Catharine Lorillard Wolfe. Suggested inspirations have included the Greek romance Daphnis and Chloe by Longus as well as the romantic tale Paul et Virginie by Bernardin de Saint-Pierre. Painting: Pierre Auguste Cot Recently featured: Charolais bull Jesse B. Jackson Dynjandi Archive More featured pictures... Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning materials and activities Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 5,393,689 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=762066868" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Main Page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Languages ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Galego ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Român? ??????? Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? This page was last modified on 26 January 2017, at 12:39. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia |||Wikipedia From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article is about the Internet encyclopedia. For Wikipedia's home page, see Wikipedia's Main Page. For Wikipedia's visitor introduction, see Wikipedia's About Page. For other uses, see Wikipedia (disambiguation). Wikipedia The logo of Wikipedia, a globe featuring glyphs from several writing systems[notes 1] Screenshot  Main Page of the English Wikipedia on April 6, 2017 Type of site Internet encyclopedia Available in 295 languages Owner Wikimedia Foundation Created by Jimmy Wales, Larry Sanger[1] Slogan(s) The free encyclopedia that anyone can edit Website wikipedia.org Alexa rank 5 (Global, April 2017[update]) Commercial No Registration Optional[notes 2] Users >312,808 active users[notes 3] and >67,527,543 registered users Launched January 15, 2001; 16 years ago (2001-01-15) Current status Active Content license CC Attribution / Share-Alike 3.0 Most text is also dual-licensed under GFDL; media licensing varies Written in LAMP platform[2] OCLC number 52075003 Wikipedia (i/?w?k??pi?di?/ or i/?w?ki?pi?di?/ WIK-i-PEE-dee-?) is a free online encyclopedia with the aim to allow anyone to edit articles.[3] Wikipedia is the largest and most popular general reference work on the Internet[4][5][6] and is ranked among the ten most popular websites.[7] Wikipedia is owned by the nonprofit Wikimedia Foundation.[8][9][10] Wikipedia was launched on January 15, 2001, by Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger.[11] Sanger coined its name,[12][13] a portmanteau of wiki[notes 4] and encyclopedia. There was only the English language version initially, but it quickly developed similar versions in other languages, which differ in content and in editing practices. With 5,393,611 articles,[notes 5] the English Wikipedia is the largest of the more than 290 Wikipedia encyclopedias. Overall, Wikipedia consists of more than 40 million articles in more than 250 different languages[15] and, as of February 2014[update], it had 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors each month.[16] As of March 2017, Wikipedia has about forty thousand high-quality articles known as Featured Articles and Good Articles that cover vital topics.[17][18] In 2005, Nature published a peer review comparing 42 science articles from Encyclopædia Britannica and Wikipedia, and found that Wikipedia's level of accuracy approached Encyclopædia Britannica's.[19] Criticism of Wikipedia includes claims that it exhibits systemic bias, presents a mixture of "truths, half truths, and some falsehoods",[20] and that, in controversial topics, it is subject to manipulation and spin.[21] Contents 1 History 1.1 Nupedia 1.2 Launch and early growth 1.3 Milestones 2 Openness 2.1 Restrictions 2.2 Review of changes 2.3 Vandalism 3 Policies and laws 3.1 Content policies and guidelines 4 Governance 4.1 Administrators 4.2 Dispute resolution 4.2.1 Arbitration Committee 5 Community 5.1 Diversity 6 Language editions 7 Critical reception 7.1 Accuracy of content 7.1.1 Medical information 7.2 Quality of writing 7.3 Coverage of topics and systemic bias 7.3.1 Coverage of topics and selection bias 7.3.2 Systemic bias 7.3.3 Identifying the filter-bubble problem 7.4 Explicit content 7.5 Privacy 7.6 Sexism 8 Operation 8.1 Wikimedia Foundation and Wikimedia movement affiliates 8.2 Software operations and support 8.3 Automated editing 8.4 Wikiprojects, and assessments of articles' importance and quality 8.5 Hardware operations and support 8.6 Internal research and operational development 8.7 Internal news publications 9 Access to content 9.1 Content licensing 9.2 Methods of access 9.2.1 Mobile access 10 Cultural impact 10.1 Readership 10.2 Cultural significance 10.2.1 Awards 10.2.2 Satire 10.3 Sister projects – Wikimedia 10.4 Publishing 10.5 Scientific use 11 Related projects 12 See also 13 References 13.1 Notes 14 Further reading 14.1 Academic studies 14.2 Books 14.3 Book reviews and other articles 14.3.1 Learning resources 14.3.2 Other media coverage 15 External links History Main article: History of Wikipedia Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger Nupedia Wikipedia originally developed from another encyclopedia project called Nupedia Other collaborative online encyclopedias were attempted before Wikipedia, but none were so successful.[22] Wikipedia began as a complementary project for Nupedia, a free online English-language encyclopedia project whose articles were written by experts and reviewed under a formal process.[11] Nupedia was founded on March 9, 2000, under the ownership of Bomis, a web portal company. Its main figures were Jimmy Wales, the CEO of Bomis, and Larry Sanger, editor-in-chief for Nupedia and later Wikipedia. Nupedia was licensed initially under its own Nupedia Open Content License, switching to the GNU Free Documentation License before Wikipedia's founding at the urging of Richard Stallman.[23] Sanger and Wales founded Wikipedia.[24][25] While Wales is credited with defining the goal of making a publicly editable encyclopedia,[26][27] Sanger is credited with the strategy of using a wiki to reach that goal.[28] On January 10, 2001, Sanger proposed on the Nupedia mailing list to create a wiki as a "feeder" project for Nupedia.[29] Play media Wikipedia according to Simpleshow External audio The Great Book of Knowledge, Part 1, Ideas with Paul Kennedy, CBC, January 15, 2014 Launch and early growth Wikipedia was launched on January 15, 2001, as a single English-language edition at www.wikipedia.com,[30] and announced by Sanger on the Nupedia mailing list.[26] Wikipedia's policy of "neutral point-of-view"[31] was codified in its first months. Otherwise, there were relatively few rules initially and Wikipedia operated independently of Nupedia.[26] Originally, Bomis intended to make Wikipedia a business for profit.[32] Wikipedia gained early contributors from Nupedia, Slashdot postings, and web search engine indexing. By August 8, 2001, Wikipedia had over 8,000 articles.[33] On September 25, 2001, Wikipedia had over 13,000 articles.[34] By the end of 2001, it had grown to approximately 20,000 articles and 18 language editions. It had reached 26 language editions by late 2002, 46 by the end of 2003, and 161 by the final days of 2004.[35] Nupedia and Wikipedia coexisted until the former's servers were taken down permanently in 2003, and its text was incorporated into Wikipedia. The English Wikipedia passed the mark of two million articles on September 9, 2007, making it the largest encyclopedia ever assembled, surpassing even the 1408 Yongle Encyclopedia, which had held the record for almost 600 years.[36] Citing fears of commercial advertising and lack of control in Wikipedia, users of the Spanish Wikipedia forked from Wikipedia to create the Enciclopedia Libre in February 2002.[37] These moves encouraged Wales to announce that Wikipedia would not display advertisements, and to change Wikipedia's domain from wikipedia.com to wikipedia.org.[38] Though the English Wikipedia reached three million articles in August 2009, the growth of the edition, in terms of the numbers of articles and of contributors, appears to have peaked around early 2007.[39] Around 1,800 articles were added daily to the encyclopedia in 2006; by 2013 that average was roughly 800.[40] A team at the Palo Alto Research Center attributed this slowing of growth to the project's increasing exclusivity and resistance to change.[41] Others suggest that the growth is flattening naturally because articles that could be called "low-hanging fruit"—topics that clearly merit an article—have already been created and built up extensively.[42][43][44] In November 2009, a researcher at the Rey Juan Carlos University in Madrid (Spain) found that the English Wikipedia had lost 49,000 editors during the first three months of 2009; in comparison, the project lost only 4,900 editors during the same period in 2008.[45][46] The Wall Street Journal cited the array of rules applied to editing and disputes related to such content among the reasons for this trend.[47] Wales disputed these claims in 2009, denying the decline and questioning the methodology of the study.[48] Two years later, in 2011, Wales acknowledged the presence of a slight decline, noting a decrease from "a little more than 36,000 writers" in June 2010 to 35,800 in June 2011. In the same interview, Wales also claimed the number of editors was "stable and sustainable".[49] A 2013 article titled "The Decline of Wikipedia" in MIT's Technology Review questioned this claim. The article revealed that since 2007, Wikipedia had lost a third of the volunteer editors who update and correct the online encyclopedia and those still there have focused increasingly on minutiae.[50] In July 2012, the Atlantic reported that the number of administrators is also in decline.[51] In the November 25, 2013, issue of New York magazine, Katherine Ward stated "Wikipedia, the sixth-most-used website, is facing an internal crisis".[52] Wikipedia blackout protest against SOPA on January 18, 2012 Play media A promotional video of the Wikimedia Foundation that encourages viewers to edit Wikipedia, mostly reviewing 2014 via Wikipedia content Milestones In January 2007, Wikipedia entered for the first time the top-ten list of the most popular websites in the U.S., according to comScore Networks. With 42.9 million unique visitors, Wikipedia was ranked number 9, surpassing the New York Times (#10) and Apple (#11). This marked a significant increase over January 2006, when the rank was number 33, with Wikipedia receiving around 18.3 million unique visitors.[53] As of March 2015[update], Wikipedia has rank 5[7][54] among websites in terms of popularity according to Alexa Internet. In 2014, it received 8 billion pageviews every month.[55] On February 9, 2014, The New York Times reported that Wikipedia has 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors a month, "according to the ratings firm comScore."[16] On January 18, 2012, the English Wikipedia participated in a series of coordinated protests against two proposed laws in the United States Congress—the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA) and the PROTECT IP Act (PIPA)—by blacking out its pages for 24 hours.[56] More than 162 million people viewed the blackout explanation page that temporarily replaced Wikipedia content.[57][58] Loveland and Reagle argue that, in process, Wikipedia follows a long tradition of historical encyclopedias that accumulated improvements piecemeal through "stigmergic accumulation".[59][60] On January 20, 2014, Subodh Varma reporting for The Economic Times indicated that not only had Wikipedia's growth flattened but that it has "lost nearly 10 per cent of its page-views last year. That's a decline of about 2 billion between December 2012 and December 2013. Its most popular versions are leading the slide: page-views of the English Wikipedia declined by 12 per cent, those of German version slid by 17 per cent and the Japanese version lost 9 per cent."[61] Varma added that, "While Wikipedia's managers think that this could be due to errors in counting, other experts feel that Google's Knowledge Graphs project launched last year may be gobbling up Wikipedia users."[61] When contacted on this matter, Clay Shirky, associate professor at New York University and fellow at Harvard's Berkman Center for Internet and Security indicated that he suspected much of the page view decline was due to Knowledge Graphs, stating, "If you can get your question answered from the search page, you don't need to click [any further]."[61] By the end of December 2016, Wikipedia was ranked fifth in the most popular websites globally.[62] Number of Wikipedia articles[63] Wikipedia editors with >100 edits per month[63] Openness Differences between versions of an article are highlighted as shown Unlike traditional encyclopedias, Wikipedia follows the procrastination principle[notes 6][64] regarding the security of its content.[64] It started almost entirely open—anyone could create articles, and any Wikipedia article could be edited by any reader, even those who did not have a Wikipedia account. Modifications to all articles would be published immediately. As a result, any article could contain inaccuracies such as errors, ideological biases, and nonsensical or irrelevant text. Restrictions Due to the increasing popularity of Wikipedia, popular editions, including the English version, have introduced editing restrictions in some cases. For instance, on the English Wikipedia and some other language editions, only registered users may create a new article.[65] On the English Wikipedia, among others, some particularly controversial, sensitive and/or vandalism-prone pages have been protected to some degree.[66][67] A frequently vandalized article can be semi-protected or extended confirmed protected, meaning that only autoconfirmed or extended confirmed editors are able to modify it.[68] A particularly contentious article may be locked so that only administrators are able to make changes.[69] In certain cases, all editors are allowed to submit modifications, but review is required for some editors, depending on certain conditions. For example, the German Wikipedia maintains "stable versions" of articles,[70] which have passed certain reviews. Following protracted trials and community discussion, the English Wikipedia introduced the "pending changes" system in December 2012.[71] Under this system, new and unregistered users' edits to certain controversial or vandalism-prone articles are reviewed by established users before they are published.[72] The editing interface of Wikipedia Review of changes Although changes are not systematically reviewed, the software that powers Wikipedia provides certain tools allowing anyone to review changes made by others. The "History" page of each article links to each revision.[notes 7][73] On most articles, anyone can undo others' changes by clicking a link on the article's history page. Anyone can view the latest changes to articles, and anyone may maintain a "watchlist" of articles that interest them so they can be notified of any changes. "New pages patrol" is a process whereby newly created articles are checked for obvious problems.[74] In 2003, economics PhD student Andrea Ciffolilli argued that the low transaction costs of participating in a wiki create a catalyst for collaborative development, and that features such as allowing easy access to past versions of a page favor "creative construction" over "creative destruction".[75] Vandalism Main article: Vandalism on Wikipedia Any change or edit that manipulates content in a way that purposefully compromises the integrity of Wikipedia is considered vandalism. The most common and obvious types of vandalism include additions of obscenities and crude humor. Vandalism can also include advertising and other types of spam.[76] Sometimes editors commit vandalism by removing content or entirely blanking a given page. Less common types of vandalism, such as the deliberate addition of plausible but false information to an article, can be more difficult to detect. Vandals can introduce irrelevant formatting, modify page semantics such as the page's title or categorization, manipulate the underlying code of an article, or use images disruptively.[77] American journalist John Seigenthaler (1927–2014), subject of the Seigenthaler incident Obvious vandalism is generally easy to remove from Wikipedia articles; the median time to detect and fix vandalism is a few minutes.[78][79] However, some vandalism takes much longer to repair.[80] In the Seigenthaler biography incident, an anonymous editor introduced false information into the biography of American political figure John Seigenthaler in May 2005. Seigenthaler was falsely presented as a suspect in the assassination of John F. Kennedy.[80] The article remained uncorrected for four months.[80] Seigenthaler, the founding editorial director of USA Today and founder of the Freedom Forum First Amendment Center at Vanderbilt University, called Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales and asked whether he had any way of knowing who contributed the misinformation. Wales replied that he did not, although the perpetrator was eventually traced.[81][82] After the incident, Seigenthaler described Wikipedia as "a flawed and irresponsible research tool".[80] This incident led to policy changes at Wikipedia, specifically targeted at tightening up the verifiability of biographical articles of living people.[83] Policies and laws See also: Wikipedia:Five Pillars External video Wikimania, 60 Minutes, CBS, 20 minutes, April 5, 2015, co-founder Jimmy Wales at Fosdem Content in Wikipedia is subject to the laws (in particular, copyright laws) of the United States and of the U.S. state of Virginia, where the majority of Wikipedia's servers are located. Beyond legal matters, the editorial principles of Wikipedia are embodied in the "five pillars" and in numerous policies and guidelines intended to appropriately shape content. Even these rules are stored in wiki form, and Wikipedia editors write and revise the website's policies and guidelines.[84] Editors can enforce these rules by deleting or modifying non-compliant material. Originally, rules on the non-English editions of Wikipedia were based on a translation of the rules for the English Wikipedia. They have since diverged to some extent.[70] Content policies and guidelines According to the rules on the English Wikipedia, each entry in Wikipedia must be about a topic that is encyclopedic and is not a dictionary entry or dictionary-like.[85] A topic should also meet Wikipedia's standards of "notability",[86] which generally means that the topic must have been covered in mainstream media or major academic journal sources that are independent of the article's subject. Further, Wikipedia intends to convey only knowledge that is already established and recognized.[87] It must not present original research. A claim that is likely to be challenged requires a reference to a reliable source. Among Wikipedia editors, this is often phrased as "verifiability, not truth" to express the idea that the readers, not the encyclopedia, are ultimately responsible for checking the truthfulness of the articles and making their own interpretations.[88] This can at times lead to the removal of information that is valid.[89] Finally, Wikipedia must not take sides.[90] All opinions and viewpoints, if attributable to external sources, must enjoy an appropriate share of coverage within an article.[91] This is known as neutral point of view (NPOV). Governance Further information: Wikipedia:Administration Wikipedia's initial anarchy integrated democratic and hierarchical elements over time.[92][93] An article is not considered to be owned by its creator or any other editor and is not vetted by any recognized authority.[94] Wikipedia's contributors avoid a tragedy of the commons by internalizing benefits. They do this by experiencing flow and identifying with and gaining status in the Wikipedia community.[95] Administrators Editors in good standing in the community can run for one of many levels of volunteer stewardship: this begins with "administrator",[96][97] privileged users who can delete pages, prevent articles from being changed in case of vandalism or editorial disputes, and try to prevent certain persons from editing. Despite the name, administrators are not supposed to enjoy any special privilege in decision-making; instead, their powers are mostly limited to making edits that have project-wide effects and thus are disallowed to ordinary editors, and to implement restrictions intended to prevent certain persons from making disruptive edits (such as vandalism).[98][99] Fewer editors become administrators than in years past, in part because the process of vetting potential Wikipedia administrators has become more rigorous.[100] Bureaucrats name new administrators, solely upon the recommendations from the community. Dispute resolution Wikipedians often have disputes regarding content, which may result in repeatedly making opposite changes to an article, known as edit warring[101][102] Over time, Wikipedia has developed a semi-formal dispute resolution process to assist in such circumstances. In order to determine community consensus, editors can raise issues at appropriate community forums,[notes 8] or seek outside input through third opinion requests or by initiating a more general community discussion known as a request for comment. Arbitration Committee Main article: Arbitration Committee The Arbitration Committee presides over the ultimate dispute resolution process. Although disputes usually arise from a disagreement between two opposing views on how an article should read, the Arbitration Committee explicitly refuses to directly rule on the specific view that should be adopted. Statistical analyses suggest that the committee ignores the content of disputes and rather focuses on the way disputes are conducted,[103] functioning not so much to resolve disputes and make peace between conflicting editors, but to weed out problematic editors while allowing potentially productive editors back in to participate. Therefore, the committee does not dictate the content of articles, although it sometimes condemns content changes when it deems the new content violates Wikipedia policies (for example, if the new content is considered biased). Its remedies include cautions and probations (used in 63% of cases) and banning editors from articles (43%), subject matters (23%) or Wikipedia (16%). Complete bans from Wikipedia are generally limited to instances of impersonation and anti-social behavior. When conduct is not impersonation or anti-social, but rather anti-consensus or in violation of editing policies, remedies tend to be limited to warnings.[104] Community Main article: Wikipedia community Play media Video of Wikimania 2005 – an annual conference for users of Wikipedia and other projects operated by the Wikimedia Foundation, was held in Frankfurt am Main, Germany from August 4 to 8. Each article and each user of Wikipedia has an associated "Talk" page. These form the primary communication channel for editors to discuss, coordinate and debate.[105] Play media Wikipedians and British Museum curators collaborate on the article Hoxne Hoard in June 2010 Wikipedia's community has been described as cult-like,[106] although not always with entirely negative connotations.[107] The project's preference for cohesiveness, even if it requires compromise that includes disregard of credentials, has been referred to as "anti-elitism".[108] Wikipedians sometimes award one another virtual barnstars for good work. These personalized tokens of appreciation reveal a wide range of valued work extending far beyond simple editing to include social support, administrative actions, and types of articulation work.[109] Wikipedia does not require that its editors and contributors provide identification.[110] As Wikipedia grew, "Who writes Wikipedia?" became one of the questions frequently asked on the project.[111] Jimmy Wales once argued that only "a community ... a dedicated group of a few hundred volunteers" makes the bulk of contributions to Wikipedia and that the project is therefore "much like any traditional organization".[112] In 2008, a Slate magazine article reported that: "According to researchers in Palo Alto, 1 percent of Wikipedia users are responsible for about half of the site's edits."[113] This method of evaluating contributions was later disputed by Aaron Swartz, who noted that several articles he sampled had large portions of their content (measured by number of characters) contributed by users with low edit counts.[114] The English Wikipedia has 5,393,611 articles, 30,795,277 registered editors, and 135,691 active editors. An editor is considered active if they have made one or more edits in the past thirty days. Editors who fail to comply with Wikipedia cultural rituals, such as signing talk page comments, may implicitly signal that they are Wikipedia outsiders, increasing the odds that Wikipedia insiders may target or discount their contributions. Becoming a Wikipedia insider involves non-trivial costs: the contributor is expected to learn Wikipedia-specific technological codes, submit to a sometimes convoluted dispute resolution process, and learn a "baffling culture rich with in-jokes and insider references".[115] Editors who do not log in are in some sense second-class citizens on Wikipedia,[115] as "participants are accredited by members of the wiki community, who have a vested interest in preserving the quality of the work product, on the basis of their ongoing participation",[116] but the contribution histories of anonymous unregistered editors recognized only by their IP addresses cannot be attributed to a particular editor with certainty. A 2007 study by researchers from Dartmouth College found that "anonymous and infrequent contributors to Wikipedia […] are as reliable a source of knowledge as those contributors who register with the site".[117] Jimmy Wales stated in 2009 that "(I)t turns out over 50% of all the edits are done by just .7% of the users... 524 people... And in fact the most active 2%, which is 1400 people, have done 73.4% of all the edits."[112] However, Business Insider editor and journalist Henry Blodget showed in 2009 that in a random sample of articles, most content in Wikipedia (measured by the amount of contributed text that survives to the latest sampled edit) is created by "outsiders", while most editing and formatting is done by "insiders".[112] A 2008 study found that Wikipedians were less agreeable, open, and conscientious than others,[118][119] although a later commentary pointed out serious flaws, including that the data showed higher openness, that the differences with the control group were small as were the samples.[120] According to a 2009 study, there is "evidence of growing resistance from the Wikipedia community to new content".[121] Diversity Wikipedia editor demographics (2008) One study found that the contributor base to Wikipedia "was barely 13% women; the average age of a contributor was in the mid-20s".[122] A 2011 study by researchers from the University of Minnesota found that females comprised 16.1% of the 38,497 editors who started editing Wikipedia during 2009.[123] In a January 2011 New York Times article, Noam Cohen observed that just 13% of Wikipedia's contributors are female according to a 2008 Wikimedia Foundation survey.[124] Sue Gardner, a former executive director of the Wikimedia Foundation, hoped to see female contributions increase to 25% by 2015.[125] Linda Basch, president of the National Council for Research on Women, noted the contrast in these Wikipedia editor statistics with the percentage of women currently completing bachelor's degrees, master's degrees and PhD programs in the United States (all at rates of 50 percent or greater).[126] In response, various universities have hosted edit-a-thons to encourage more women to participate in the Wikipedia community. In fall 2013, 15 colleges and universities — including Yale, Brown, and Pennsylvania State — offered college credit for students to "write feminist thinking" about technology into Wikipedia.[127] Estimates of the diversity of contributors by educational level have indicated that sixty-two percent of Wikipedia's editors are at the high school and undergraduate college level of education.[128] In August 2014, Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales said in a BBC interview that the Wikimedia Foundation was "... really doubling down our efforts ..." to reach 25% of female editors (originally targeted by 2015), since the Foundation had "totally failed" so far. Wales said "a lot of things need to happen ... a lot of outreach, a lot of software changes".[129] Andrew Lih, writing in The New York Times, was quoted by Bloomberg News in December 2016 as supporting Wales comments concerning shortfalls in Wikipedia's outreach to female editors. Lih states his concern with the question indicating that: "How can you get people to participate in an (editing) environment that feels unsafe, where identifying yourself as a woman, as a feminist, could open you up to ugly, intimidating behavior".[130] Language editions There are currently 295 language editions of Wikipedia (also called language versions, or simply Wikipedias). Thirteen of these have over one million articles each (English, Swedish, Cebuano, German, Dutch, French, Russian, Italian, Spanish, Waray-Waray, Polish, Vietnamese and Japanese), five more have over 500,000 articles (Portuguese, Chinese, Ukrainian, Catalan and Persian), 40 more have over 100,000 articles, and 77 more have over 10,000 articles.[131][132] The largest, the English Wikipedia, has over 5.3 million articles. As of January 2017[update], according to Alexa, the English subdomain (en.wikipedia.org; English Wikipedia) receives approximately 55% of Wikipedia's cumulative traffic, with the remaining split among the other languages (Russian: 9%; Japanese: 7%; Spanish: 6%; French: 4%).[7] As of April 2017, the six largest language editions are (in order of article count) the English, Cebuano, Swedish, German, Dutch, and French Wikipedias.[133] Distribution of the 44,160,825 articles in different language editions (as of 26 April 2017)[134]   English (12.2%)   Cebuano (9.4%)   Swedish (8.6%)   German (4.6%)   Dutch (4.3%)   French (4.2%)   Russian (3.1%)   Italian (3%)   Spanish (3%)   Waray (2.9%)   Polish (2.8%)   Vietnamese (2.6%)   Japanese (2.4%)   Portuguese (2.2%)   Other (34.7%) Logarithmic graph of the 20 largest language editions of Wikipedia (as of 26 April 2017)[135] (millions of articles) 0.1 0.3 1 3 English 5,393,611 Cebuano 4,138,135 Swedish 3,785,049 German 2,048,714 Dutch 1,897,908 French 1,858,259 Russian 1,384,908 Italian 1,346,331 Spanish 1,327,066 Waray 1,262,379 Polish 1,215,642 Vietnamese 1,155,136 Japanese 1,055,534 Portuguese 964,262 Chinese 934,268 Ukrainian 688,922 Catalan 538,744 Persian 526,845 Arabic 513,311 Norwegian 464,789 The unit for the numbers in bars is articles. Since Wikipedia is based on the Web and therefore worldwide, contributors to the same language edition may use different dialects or may come from different countries (as is the case for the English edition). These differences may lead to some conflicts over spelling differences (e.g. colour versus color)[136] or points of view.[137] Though the various language editions are held to global policies such as "neutral point of view", they diverge on some points of policy and practice, most notably on whether images that are not licensed freely may be used under a claim of fair use.[138][139][140] Jimmy Wales has described Wikipedia as "an effort to create and distribute a free encyclopedia of the highest possible quality to every single person on the planet in their own language".[141] Though each language edition functions more or less independently, some efforts are made to supervise them all. They are coordinated in part by Meta-Wiki, the Wikimedia Foundation's wiki devoted to maintaining all of its projects (Wikipedia and others).[142] For instance, Meta-Wiki provides important statistics on all language editions of Wikipedia,[143] and it maintains a list of articles every Wikipedia should have.[144] The list concerns basic content by subject: biography, history, geography, society, culture, science, technology, and mathematics. As for the rest, it is not rare for articles strongly related to a particular language not to have counterparts in another edition. For example, articles about small towns in the United States might only be available in English, even when they meet notability criteria of other language Wikipedia projects. Estimation of contributions shares from different regions in the world to different Wikipedia editions Translated articles represent only a small portion of articles in most editions, in part because fully automated translation of articles is disallowed.[145] Articles available in more than one language may offer "interwiki links", which link to the counterpart articles in other editions. A study published by PLOS ONE in 2012 also estimated the share of contributions to different editions of Wikipedia from different regions of the world. It reported that the proportion of the edits made from North America was 51% for the English Wikipedia, and 25% for the simple English Wikipedia.[146] The Wikimedia Foundation hopes to increase the number of editors in the Global South to thirty-seven percent by 2015.[147] On March 1, 2014, The Economist in an article titled "The Future of Wikipedia" cited a trend analysis concerning data published by Wikimedia stating that: "The number of editors for the English-language version has fallen by a third in seven years."[148] The attrition rate for active editors in English Wikipedia was cited by The Economist as substantially in contrast to statistics for Wikipedia in other languages (non-English Wikipedia). The Economist reported that the number of contributors with an average of five of more edits per month was relatively constant since 2008 for Wikipedia in other languages at approximately 42,000 editors within narrow seasonal variances of about 2,000 editors up or down. The attrition rates for editors in English Wikipedia, by sharp comparison, were cited as peaking in 2007 at approximately 50,000 editors which has dropped to 30,000 editors as of the start of 2014. At the quoted trend rate, the number of active editors in English Wikipedia has lost approximately 20,000 editors to attrition since 2007, and the documented trend rate indicates the loss of another 20,000 editors by 2021, down to 10,000 active editors on English Wikipedia by 2021 if left unabated.[148] Given that the trend analysis published in The Economist presents the number of active editors for Wikipedia in other languages (non-English Wikipedia) as remaining relatively constant and successful in sustaining its numbers at approximately 42,000 active editors, the contrast has pointed to the effectiveness of Wikipedia in other languages to retain its active editors on a renewable and sustained basis.[148] No comment was made concerning which of the differentiated edit policy standards from Wikipedia in other languages (non-English Wikipedia) would provide a possible alternative to English Wikipedia for effectively ameliorating substantial editor attrition rates on the English language Wikipedia.[149] Critical reception See also: Academic studies about Wikipedia and Criticism of Wikipedia Several Wikipedians have criticized Wikipedia's large and growing regulation, which includes over 50 policies and nearly 150,000 words as of 2014[update].[150][151] Critics have stated that Wikipedia exhibits systemic bias. Columnist and journalist Edwin Black criticizes Wikipedia for being a mixture of "truth, half truth, and some falsehoods".[20] Articles in The Chronicle of Higher Education and The Journal of Academic Librarianship have criticized Wikipedia's Undue Weight policy, concluding that the fact that Wikipedia explicitly is not designed to provide correct information about a subject, but rather focus on all the major viewpoints on the subject and give less attention to minor ones, creates omissions that can lead to false beliefs based on incomplete information.[152][153][154] Journalists Oliver Kamm and Edwin Black noted how articles are dominated by the loudest and most persistent voices, usually by a group with an "ax to grind" on the topic.[20][155] An article in Education Next Journal concluded that as a resource about controversial topics, Wikipedia is notoriously subject to manipulation and spin.[21] In 2006, the Wikipedia Watch criticism website listed dozens of examples of plagiarism in the English Wikipedia.[156] Accuracy of content Main article: Reliability of Wikipedia Articles for traditional encyclopedias such as Encyclopædia Britannica are carefully and deliberately written by experts, lending such encyclopedias a reputation for accuracy.[157] Conversely, Wikipedia is often cited for factual inaccuracies and misrepresentations. However, a peer review in 2005 of forty-two scientific entries on both Wikipedia and Encyclopædia Britannica by the science journal Nature found few differences in accuracy, and concluded that "the average science entry in Wikipedia contained around four inaccuracies; Britannica, about three."[19] Reagle suggested that while the study reflects "a topical strength of Wikipedia contributors" in science articles, "Wikipedia may not have fared so well using a random sampling of articles or on humanities subjects."[158] The findings by Nature were disputed by Encyclopædia Britannica,[159][160] and in response, Nature gave a rebuttal of the points raised by Britannica.[161] In addition to the point-for-point disagreement between these two parties, others have examined the sample size and selection method used in the Nature effort, and suggested a "flawed study design" (in Nature's manual selection of articles, in part or in whole, for comparison), absence of statistical analysis (e.g., of reported confidence intervals), and a lack of study "statistical power" (i.e., owing to small sample size, 42 or 4 x 101 articles compared, vs >105 and >106 set sizes for Britannica and the English Wikipedia, respectively).[162] As a consequence of the open structure, Wikipedia "makes no guarantee of validity" of its content, since no one is ultimately responsible for any claims appearing in it.[163] Concerns have been raised by PC World in 2009 regarding the lack of accountability that results from users' anonymity,[164] the insertion of false information,[165] vandalism, and similar problems. Economist Tyler Cowen wrote: "If I had to guess whether Wikipedia or the median refereed journal article on economics was more likely to be true, after a not so long think I would opt for Wikipedia." He comments that some traditional sources of non-fiction suffer from systemic biases and novel results, in his opinion, are over-reported in journal articles and relevant information is omitted from news reports. However, he also cautions that errors are frequently found on Internet sites, and that academics and experts must be vigilant in correcting them.[166] Critics argue that Wikipedia's open nature and a lack of proper sources for most of the information makes it unreliable.[167] Some commentators suggest that Wikipedia may be reliable, but that the reliability of any given article is not clear.[168] Editors of traditional reference works such as the Encyclopædia Britannica have questioned the project's utility and status as an encyclopedia.[169] External video Inside Wikipedia – Attack of the PR Industry, Deutsche Welle, 7:13 mins[170] Wikipedia's open structure inherently makes it an easy target for Internet trolls, spammers, and various forms of paid advocacy seen as counterproductive to the maintenance of a neutral and verifiable online encyclopedia.[73][171] In response to paid advocacy editing and undisclosed editing issues, Wikipedia was reported in an article by Jeff Elder in The Wall Street Journal on June 16, 2014, to have strengthened its rules and laws against undisclosed editing.[172] The article stated that: "Beginning Monday [from date of article], changes in Wikipedia's terms of use will require anyone paid to edit articles to disclose that arrangement. Katherine Maher, the nonprofit Wikimedia Foundation's chief communications officer, said the changes address a sentiment among volunteer editors that, 'we're not an advertising service; we're an encyclopedia.'"[172][173][174][175][176] These issues, among others, had been parodied since the first decade of Wikipedia, notably by Stephen Colbert on The Colbert Report.[177] Most university lecturers discourage students from citing any encyclopedia in academic work, preferring primary sources;[178] some specifically prohibit Wikipedia citations.[179][180] Wales stresses that encyclopedias of any type are not usually appropriate to use as citeable sources, and should not be relied upon as authoritative.[181] Wales once (2006 or earlier) said he receives about ten emails weekly from students saying they got failing grades on papers because they cited Wikipedia; he told the students they got what they deserved. "For God's sake, you're in college; don't cite the encyclopedia", he said.[182] In February 2007, an article in The Harvard Crimson newspaper reported that a few of the professors at Harvard University were including Wikipedia articles in their syllabi, although without realizing the articles might change.[183] In June 2007, former president of the American Library Association Michael Gorman condemned Wikipedia, along with Google,[184] stating that academics who endorse the use of Wikipedia are "the intellectual equivalent of a dietitian who recommends a steady diet of Big Macs with everything". A Harvard law textbook, Legal Research in a Nutshell (2011), cites Wikipedia as a "general source" that "can be a real boon" in "coming up to speed in the law governing a situation" and, "while not authoritative, can provide basic facts as well as leads to more in-depth resources".[185] Medical information See also: Health information on Wikipedia On March 5, 2014, Julie Beck writing for The Atlantic magazine in an article titled "Doctors' #1 Source for Healthcare Information: Wikipedia", stated that "Fifty percent of physicians look up conditions on the (Wikipedia) site, and some are editing articles themselves to improve the quality of available information."[186] Beck continued to detail in this article new programs of Dr. Amin Azzam at the University of San Francisco to offer medical school courses to medical students for learning to edit and improve Wikipedia articles on health-related issues, as well as internal quality control programs within Wikipedia organized by Dr. James Heilman to improve a group of 200 health-related articles of central medical importance up to Wikipedia's highest standard of articles using its Featured Article and Good Article peer review evaluation process.[186] In a May 7, 2014, follow-up article in The Atlantic titled "Can Wikipedia Ever Be a Definitive Medical Text?", Julie Beck quotes Wikiproject Medicine's Dr. James Heilman as stating: "Just because a reference is peer-reviewed doesn't mean it's a high-quality reference."[187] Beck added that: "Wikipedia has its own peer review process before articles can be classified as 'good' or 'featured.' Heilman, who has participated in that process before, says 'less than 1 percent' of Wikipedia's medical articles have passed.[187] Quality of writing In 2008, researchers at Carnegie Mellon University found that the quality of a Wikipedia article would suffer rather than gain from adding more writers when the article lacked appropriate explicit or implicit coordination.[188] For instance, when contributors rewrite small portions of an entry rather than making full-length revisions, high- and low-quality content may be intermingled within an entry. Roy Rosenzweig, a history professor, stated that American National Biography Online outperformed Wikipedia in terms of its "clear and engaging prose", which, he said, was an important aspect of good historical writing.[189] Contrasting Wikipedia's treatment of Abraham Lincoln to that of Civil War historian James McPherson in American National Biography Online, he said that both were essentially accurate and covered the major episodes in Lincoln's life, but praised "McPherson's richer contextualization […] his artful use of quotations to capture Lincoln's voice […] and […] his ability to convey a profound message in a handful of words." By contrast, he gives an example of Wikipedia's prose that he finds "both verbose and dull". Rosenzweig also criticized the "waffling—encouraged by the NPOV policy—[which] means that it is hard to discern any overall interpretive stance in Wikipedia history". By example, he quoted the conclusion of Wikipedia's article on William Clarke Quantrill. While generally praising the article, he pointed out its "waffling" conclusion: "Some historians […] remember him as an opportunistic, bloodthirsty outlaw, while others continue to view him as a daring soldier and local folk hero."[189] Other critics have made similar charges that, even if Wikipedia articles are factually accurate, they are often written in a poor, almost unreadable style. Frequent Wikipedia critic Andrew Orlowski commented: "Even when a Wikipedia entry is 100 per cent factually correct, and those facts have been carefully chosen, it all too often reads as if it has been translated from one language to another then into to a third, passing an illiterate translator at each stage."[190] A study of Wikipedia articles on cancer was conducted in 2010 by Yaacov Lawrence of the Kimmel Cancer Center at Thomas Jefferson University. The study was limited to those articles that could be found in the Physician Data Query and excluded those written at the "start" class or "stub" class level. Lawrence found the articles accurate but not very readable, and thought that "Wikipedia's lack of readability (to non-college readers) may reflect its varied origins and haphazard editing".[191] The Economist argued that better-written articles tend to be more reliable: "inelegant or ranting prose usually reflects muddled thoughts and incomplete information".[192] Coverage of topics and systemic bias See also: Notability in the English Wikipedia and Criticism of Wikipedia § Systemic bias in coverage Parts of this article (those related to d:Wikidata:Statistics/Wikipedia) need to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (March 2017) Wikipedia seeks to create a summary of all human knowledge in the form of an online encyclopedia, with each topic covered encyclopedically in one article. Since it has terabytes of disk space, it can have far more topics than can be covered by any printed encyclopedia.[193] The exact degree and manner of coverage on Wikipedia is under constant review by its editors, and disagreements are not uncommon (see deletionism and inclusionism).[194][195] Wikipedia contains materials that some people may find objectionable, offensive, or pornographic because Wikipedia is not censored. The policy has sometimes proved controversial: in 2008, Wikipedia rejected an online petition against the inclusion of images of Muhammad in the English edition of its Muhammad article, citing this policy. The presence of politically, religiously, and pornographically sensitive materials in Wikipedia has led to the censorship of Wikipedia by national authorities in China,[196] Pakistan,[197] and the United Kingdom,[198] among other countries. Pie chart of Wikipedia content by subject as of January 2008[199] A 2008 study conducted by researchers at Carnegie Mellon University and Palo Alto Research Center gave a distribution of topics as well as growth (from July 2006 to January 2008) in each field:[199] Culture and the arts: 30% (210%) Biographies and persons: 15% (97%) Geography and places: 14% (52%) Society and social sciences: 12% (83%) History and events: 11% (143%) Natural and physical sciences: 9% (213%) Technology and the applied sciences: 4% (?6%) Religions and belief systems: 2% (38%) Health: 2% (42%) Mathematics and logic: 1% (146%) Thought and philosophy: 1% (160%) These numbers refer only to the quantity of articles: it is possible for one topic to contain a large number of short articles and another to contain a small number of large ones. Through its "Wikipedia Loves Libraries" program, Wikipedia has partnered with major public libraries such as the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts to expand its coverage of underrepresented subjects and articles.[200] A 2011 study conducted by researchers at the University of Minnesota indicated that male and female editors focus on different coverage topics. There was a greater concentration of females in the People and Arts category, while males focus more on Geography and Science.[201] Coverage of topics and selection bias Research conducted by Mark Graham of the Oxford Internet Institute in 2009 indicated that the geographic distribution of article topics is highly uneven. Africa is most underrepresented.[202] An editorial in The Guardian in 2014 noted that women porn stars are better covered than women writers as a further example.[203] Systemic bias When multiple editors contribute to one topic or set of topics, systemic bias may arise, due to the demographic backgrounds of the editors. In 2011, Wales noted that the unevenness of coverage is a reflection of the demography of the editors, which predominantly consists of young males with high education levels in the developed world (cf. previously).[49] The October 22, 2013 essay by Tom Simonite in MIT's Technology Review titled "The Decline of Wikipedia" discussed the effect of systemic bias and policy creep on the downward trend in the number of editors.[50] Systemic bias on Wikipedia may follow that of culture generally, for example favoring certain nationalities, ethnicities or majority religions.[204] It may more specifically follow the biases of Internet culture, inclining to being young, male, English-speaking, educated, technologically aware, and wealthy enough to spare time for editing. Biases of its own may include over-emphasis on topics such as pop culture, technology, and current events.[204] Taha Yasseri of the University of Oxford, in 2013, studied the statistical trends of systemic bias at Wikipedia introduced by editing conflicts and their resolution.[205][206] His research examined the counterproductive work behavior of edit warring. Yasseri contended that simple reverts or "undo" operations were not the most significant measure of counterproductive behavior at Wikipedia and relied instead on the statistical measurement of detecting "reverting/reverted pairs" or "mutually reverting edit pairs". Such a "mutually reverting edit pair" is defined where one editor reverts the edit of another editor who then, in sequence, returns to revert the first editor in the "mutually reverting edit pairs". The results were tabulated for several language versions of Wikipedia. The English Wikipedia's three largest conflict rates belonged to the articles George W. Bush, Anarchism and Muhammad.[206] By comparison, for the German Wikipedia, the three largest conflict rates at the time of the Oxford study were for the articles covering (i) Croatia, (ii) Scientology and (iii) 9/11 conspiracy theories.[206] Researchers from the Washington University developed a statistical model to measure systematic bias in the behavior of Wikipedia's users regarding controversial topics. The authors focused on behavioral changes of the encyclopedia's administrators after assuming the post, writing that systematic bias occurred after the fact.[207][208] Identifying the filter-bubble problem Dimitra Kessenides, writing for Bloomberg News Weekly, identified the 'filter-bubble' problem as a recurrent and long-standing issue at Wikipedia.[209] As Kessenides states: "If the only way to get an article about the developing world published on Wikipedia was to know a former board member, it was hard to imagine how a random editor in Johannesburg or Bangalore would have any hope... This so-called filter-bubble problem, coined by Eli Pariser, co-founder of the viral video site Upworthy, is the idea that the internet can contribute to the insularity of certain communities. Filter bubbles have been blamed for the spread of misinformation during the 2016 presidential election and for the failure of pundits in the U.K. to anticipate Brexit... Wikipedia's filter-bubble problem is a particularly acute threat for an organization whose stated mission is 'to empower and engage people around the world.'"[209] Explicit content See also: Internet Watch Foundation and Wikipedia and Reporting of child pornography images on Wikimedia Commons “ Problem? What problem? So, you didn't know that Wikipedia has a porn problem? ” — Larry Sanger, [210] Wikipedia has been criticized for allowing information of graphic content. Articles depicting arguably objectionable content (such as Feces, Cadaver, Human penis, Vulva, and Nudity) contain graphic pictures and detailed information easily available to anyone with access to the internet, including children. The site also includes sexual content such as images and videos of masturbation and ejaculation, photographs of nude children, illustrations of zoophilia, and photos from hardcore pornographic films in its articles. The Wikipedia article about Virgin Killer—a 1976 album from German heavy metal band Scorpions—features a picture of the album's original cover, which depicts a naked prepubescent girl. The original release cover caused controversy and was replaced in some countries. In December 2008, access to the Wikipedia article Virgin Killer was blocked for four days by most Internet service providers in the United Kingdom after it was reported by a member of the public as child pornography,[211] to the Internet Watch Foundation (IWF), which issues a stop list to Internet service providers. IWF, a non-profit, non-government-affiliated organization, later criticized the inclusion of the picture as "distasteful".[212] In April 2010, Sanger wrote a letter to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, outlining his concerns that two categories of images on Wikimedia Commons contained child pornography, and were in violation of US federal obscenity law.[213] Sanger later clarified that the images, which were related to pedophilia and one about lolicon, were not of real children, but said that they constituted "obscene visual representations of the sexual abuse of children", under the PROTECT Act of 2003.[214] That law bans photographic child pornography and cartoon images and drawings of children that are obscene under American law.[214] Sanger also expressed concerns about access to the images on Wikipedia in schools.[215] Wikimedia Foundation spokesman Jay Walsh strongly rejected Sanger's accusation,[216] saying that Wikipedia did not have "material we would deem to be illegal. If we did, we would remove it."[216] Following the complaint by Sanger, Wales deleted sexual images without consulting the community. After some editors who volunteer to maintain the site argued that the decision to delete had been made hastily, Wales voluntarily gave up some of the powers he had held up to that time as part of his co-founder status. He wrote in a message to the Wikimedia Foundation mailing-list that this action was "in the interest of encouraging this discussion to be about real philosophical/content issues, rather than be about me and how quickly I acted".[217] Critics, including Wikipediocracy, noticed that many of the pornographic images deleted from Wikipedia since 2010 have reappeared.[218] Privacy One privacy concern in the case of Wikipedia is the right of a private citizen to remain a "private citizen" rather than a "public figure" in the eyes of the law.[219][notes 9] It is a battle between the right to be anonymous in cyberspace and the right to be anonymous in real life ("meatspace"). A particular problem occurs in the case of an individual who is relatively unimportant and for whom there exists a Wikipedia page against her or his wishes. In January 2006, a German court ordered the German Wikipedia shut down within Germany because it stated the full name of Boris Floricic, aka "Tron", a deceased hacker. On February 9, 2006, the injunction against Wikimedia Deutschland was overturned, with the court rejecting the notion that Tron's right to privacy or that of his parents was being violated.[220] Wikipedia has a "Volunteer Response Team" that uses the OTRS system to handle queries without having to reveal the identities of the involved parties. This is used, for example, in confirming the permission for using individual images and other media in the project.[221] Sexism Wikipedia has been described as harboring a battleground culture of sexism and harassment.[222][223] The perceived toxic attitudes and tolerance of violent and abusive language are also reasons put forth for the gender gap in Wikipedia editors.[224] In 2014, a female editor who requested a separate space on Wikipedia to discuss improving civility had her proposal referred to by a male editor using the words "the easiest way to avoid being called a cunt is not to act like one."[225] Operation A group of Wikipedia editors may form a WikiProject to focus their work on a specific topic area, using its associated discussion page to coordinate changes across multiple articles.[226] Wikimedia Foundation and Wikimedia movement affiliates Main article: Wikimedia Foundation Katherine Maher is the third executive director at Wikimedia, following the departure of Lila Tretikov in 2016. Wikipedia is hosted and funded by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization which also operates Wikipedia-related projects such as Wiktionary and Wikibooks. The foundation relies on public contributions and grants to fund its mission.[227] The foundation's 2013 IRS Form 990 shows revenue of $39.7 million and expenses of almost $29 million, with assets of $37.2 million and liabilities of about $2.3 million.[228] In May 2014, Wikimedia Foundation named Lila Tretikov as its second executive director, taking over for Sue Gardner.[229] The Wall Street Journal reported on May 1, 2014, that Tretikov's information technology background from her years at University of California offers Wikipedia an opportunity to develop in more concentrated directions guided by her often repeated position statement that, "Information, like air, wants to be free."[230][231] The same Wall Street Journal article reported these directions of development according to an interview with spokesman Jay Walsh of Wikimedia, who "said Tretikov would address that issue (paid advocacy) as a priority. 'We are really pushing toward more transparency... We are reinforcing that paid advocacy is not welcome.' Initiatives to involve greater diversity of contributors, better mobile support of Wikipedia, new geo-location tools to find local content more easily, and more tools for users in the second and third world are also priorities, Walsh said."[230] Following the departure of Tretikov from Wikipedia due to issues concerning the use of the "superprotection" feature which some language versions of Wikipedia have adopted, Katherine Maher became the third executive director the Wikimedia Foundation in June 2016.[232] Maher has stated that one of her priorities would be the issue of editor harassment endemic to Wikipedia as identified by the Wikipedia board in December. Maher stated regarding the harassment issue that: "It establishes a sense within the community that this is a priority... (and that correction requires that) it has to be more than words."[233] Wikipedia is also supported by many organizations and groups that are affiliated with the Wikimedia Foundation but independently-run, called Wikimedia movement affiliates. These include Wikimedia chapters (which are national or sub-national organizations, such as Wikimedia Deutschland and Wikimédia France), thematic organizations (such as Amical Wikimedia for the Catalan language community), and user groups. These affiliates participate in the promotion, development, and funding of Wikipedia. Software operations and support See also: MediaWiki The operation of Wikipedia depends on MediaWiki, a custom-made, free and open source wiki software platform written in PHP and built upon the MySQL database system.[234] The software incorporates programming features such as a macro language, variables, a transclusion system for templates, and URL redirection. MediaWiki is licensed under the GNU General Public License and it is used by all Wikimedia projects, as well as many other wiki projects. Originally, Wikipedia ran on UseModWiki written in Perl by Clifford Adams (Phase I), which initially required CamelCase for article hyperlinks; the present double bracket style was incorporated later. Starting in January 2002 (Phase II), Wikipedia began running on a PHP wiki engine with a MySQL database; this software was custom-made for Wikipedia by Magnus Manske. The Phase II software was repeatedly modified to accommodate the exponentially increasing demand. In July 2002 (Phase III), Wikipedia shifted to the third-generation software, MediaWiki, originally written by Lee Daniel Crocker. Several MediaWiki extensions are installed[235] to extend the functionality of the MediaWiki software. In April 2005, a Lucene extension[236][237] was added to MediaWiki's built-in search and Wikipedia switched from MySQL to Lucene for searching. The site currently uses Lucene Search 2.1,[238][needs update] which is written in Java and based on Lucene library 2.3.[239] In July 2013, after extensive beta testing, a WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) extension, VisualEditor, was opened to public use.[240][241][242][243] It was met with much rejection and criticism, and was described as "slow and buggy".[244] The feature was changed from opt-out to opt-in afterward. Automated editing Computer programs called bots have been used widely to perform simple and repetitive tasks, such as correcting common misspellings and stylistic issues, or to start articles such as geography entries in a standard format from statistical data.[245][246][247] One controversial contributor massively creating articles with his bot was reported to create up to ten thousand articles on the Swedish Wikipedia on certain days.[248] There are also some bots designed to automatically notify editors when they make common editing errors (such as unmatched quotes or unmatched parenthesis).[249] Edits misidentified by a bot as the work of a banned editor can be restored by other editors. An anti-vandal bot tries to detect and revert vandalism quickly and automatically.[246] Bots can also report edits from particular accounts or IP address ranges, as was done at the time of the MH17 jet downing incident in July 2014.[250] Bots on Wikipedia must be approved prior to activation.[251] According to Andrew Lih, the current expansion of Wikipedia to millions of articles would be difficult to envision without the use of such bots.[252] Wikiprojects, and assessments of articles' importance and quality This section is transcluded from English Wikipedia. (edit | history) Main article: WikiProject A "WikiProject" is a group of contributors who want to work together as a team to improve Wikipedia. These groups often focus on a specific topic area (for example, women's history), a specific location or a specific kind of task (for example, checking newly created pages). The English Wikipedia currently has over 2,000 WikiProjects and activity varies.[253] In 2007, in preparation for producing a print version, the English Wikipedia introduced an assessment scale of the quality of articles.[254] Articles are rated by WikiProjects. The range of quality classes begins with "Stub" (very short pages), followed by "Start", "C" and "B" (in increasing order of quality). Community peer review is needed for the article to enter one of the highest quality classes: either "A", "good article" or the highest, "featured article". Of the about 4.4 million articles and lists assessed as of March 2015, a little more than 5,000 (0.12%) are featured articles, and fewer than 2,000 (0.04%) are featured lists. One featured article per day, as selected by editors, appears on the main page of Wikipedia.[255][256] The articles can also be rated as per "importance" as judged by a WikiProject. Currently, there are 5 importance categories: "low", "mid", "high", "top", and "???" for unclassified/uncertain level. For a particular article, different WikiProjects may assign different importance levels. The Wikipedia Version 1.0 Editorial Team has developed a table (shown below) that displays data of all rated articles by quality and importance, on the English Wikipedia. If an article or list receives different ratings by two or more WikiProjects, then the highest rating is used in the table, pie-charts, and bar-chart. The software regularly auto-updates the data. Researcher Giacomo Poderi found that articles tend to reach featured status via the intensive work of a few editors.[257] A 2010 study found unevenness in quality among featured articles and concluded that the community process is ineffective in assessing the quality of articles.[258] Quality-wise distribution of over 5.5 million articles and lists on the English Wikipedia, as of 29 January 2017[update][259]   Featured articles (0.11%)   Featured lists (0.04%)   A class (0.03%)   Good articles (0.50%)   B class (2.00%)   C class (4.32%)   Start class (26.41%)   Stub class (53.01%)   Lists (3.65%)   Unassessed (9.94%) Importance-wise distribution of over 5.5 million articles and lists on the English Wikipedia, as of 29 January 2017[update][259]   Top (0.91%)   High (3.20%)   Medium (12.21%)   Low (51.68%)   ??? (32.00%) All rated articles by quality and importance Quality Importance Top High Mid Low ??? Total FA 1,189 1,841 1,732 1,091 191 6,044 FL 142 567 670 600 120 2,099 A 224 430 580 372 79 1,685 GA 2,113 4,819 9,439 10,277 1,749 28,397 B 12,177 23,035 35,303 28,337 13,885 112,737 C 10,410 30,260 67,693 94,179 43,950 246,492 Start 17,315 76,691 308,832 802,184 295,178 1,500,200 Stub 4,247 30,928 228,127 1,887,219 844,350 2,994,871 List 3,062 11,393 34,727 94,961 62,202 206,345 Assessed 50,879 179,964 687,103 2,919,220 1,261,704 5,098,870 Unassessed 137 431 1,665 16,008 533,078 551,319 Total 51,016 180,395 688,768 2,935,228 1,794,782 5,650,189 500,000 1,000,000 1,500,000 2,000,000 2,500,000 3,000,000 Top High Medium Low ???   Featured articles   Featured lists   A-class articles   Good articles   B-class articles   C-class articles   Start-class articles   Stub articles   Lists   Unassessed articles and lists [Note: The table above (prepared by the Wikipedia Version 1.0 Editorial Team) is automatically updated daily by User:WP 1.0 bot, but the bar-chart and the two pie-charts are not auto-updated. In them, new data has to be entered by a Wikipedia editor (i.e. user).] Hardware operations and support See also: Wikimedia Foundation § Hardware Wikipedia receives between 25,000 and 60,000 page requests per second, depending on time of day.[260] As of 2008[update] page requests are first passed to a front-end layer of Squid caching servers.[261][needs update] Further statistics, based on a publicly available 3-month Wikipedia access trace, are available.[262] Requests that cannot be served from the Squid cache are sent to load-balancing servers running the Linux Virtual Server software, which in turn pass them to one of the Apache web servers for page rendering from the database. The web servers deliver pages as requested, performing page rendering for all the language editions of Wikipedia. To increase speed further, rendered pages are cached in a distributed memory cache until invalidated, allowing page rendering to be skipped entirely for most common page accesses. Overview of system architecture as of December 2010[update] Wikipedia currently runs on dedicated clusters of Linux servers (mainly Ubuntu).[263][264] As of December 2009[update], there were 300 in Florida and 44 in Amsterdam.[265] By January 22, 2013, Wikipedia had migrated its primary data center to an Equinix facility in Ashburn, Virginia.[266][267] Internal research and operational development In accordance with growing amounts of incoming donations exceeding seven digits in 2013 as recently reported,[50] the Foundation has reached a threshold of assets which qualify its consideration under the principles of industrial organization economics to indicate the need for the re-investment of donations into the internal research and development of the Foundation.[268] Two of the recent projects of such internal research and development have been the creation of a Visual Editor and a largely under-utilized "Thank" tab which were developed for the purpose of ameliorating issues of editor attrition, which have met with limited success.[50][244] The estimates for reinvestment by industrial organizations into internal research and development was studied by Adam Jaffe, who recorded that the range of 4% to 25% annually was to be recommended, with high end technology requiring the higher level of support for internal reinvestment.[269] At the 2013 level of contributions for Wikimedia presently documented as 45 million dollars, the computed budget level recommended by Jaffe and Caballero for reinvestment into internal research and development is between 1.8 million and 11.3 million dollars annually.[269] In 2016, the level of contributions were reported by Blomberg News as being at $77 million annually, updating the Jaffe estimates for the higher level of support to between 3.08 million and 19.2 million dollars annually.[269] Internal news publications Community-produced news publications include the English Wikipedia's The Signpost, founded in 2005 by Michael Snow, an attorney, Wikipedia administrator and former chair of the Wikimedia Foundation board of trustees.[270] It covers news and events from the site, as well as major events from other Wikimedia projects, such as Wikimedia Commons. Similar publications are the German-language Kurier, and the Portuguese-language Correio da Wikipédia. Other past and present community news publications on English Wikipedia include the "Wikiworld" web comic, the Wikipedia Weekly podcast, and newsletters of specific WikiProjects like The Bugle from WikiProject Military History and the monthly newsletter from The Guild of Copy Editors. There are also a number of publications from the Wikimedia Foundation and multilingual publications such as the Wikimedia Blog and This Month in Education. Access to content Content licensing When the project was started in 2001, all text in Wikipedia was covered by the GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL), a copyleft license permitting the redistribution, creation of derivative works, and commercial use of content while authors retain copyright of their work.[271] The GFDL was created for software manuals that come with free software programs licensed under the GPL. This made it a poor choice for a general reference work: for example, the GFDL requires the reprints of materials from Wikipedia to come with a full copy of the GFDL text. In December 2002, the Creative Commons license was released: it was specifically designed for creative works in general, not just for software manuals. The license gained popularity among bloggers and others distributing creative works on the Web. The Wikipedia project sought the switch to the Creative Commons.[272] Because the two licenses, GFDL and Creative Commons, were incompatible, in November 2008, following the request of the project, the Free Software Foundation (FSF) released a new version of the GFDL designed specifically to allow Wikipedia to relicense its content to CC BY-SA by August 1, 2009. (A new version of the GFDL automatically covers Wikipedia contents.) In April 2009, Wikipedia and its sister projects held a community-wide referendum which decided the switch in June 2009.[273][274][275][276] The handling of media files (e.g. image files) varies across language editions. Some language editions, such as the English Wikipedia, include non-free image files under fair use doctrine, while the others have opted not to, in part because of the lack of fair use doctrines in their home countries (e.g. in Japanese copyright law). Media files covered by free content licenses (e.g. Creative Commons' CC BY-SA) are shared across language editions via Wikimedia Commons repository, a project operated by the Wikimedia Foundation. Wikipedia's accommodation of varying international copyright laws regarding images has led some to observe that its photographic coverage of topics lags behind the quality of the encyclopedic text.[277] The Wikimedia Foundation is not a licensor of content, but merely a hosting service for the contributors (and licensors) of the Wikipedia. This position has been successfully defended in court.[278][279] Methods of access Because Wikipedia content is distributed under an open license, anyone can reuse or re-distribute it at no charge. The content of Wikipedia has been published in many forms, both online and offline, outside of the Wikipedia website. Websites – Thousands of "mirror sites" exist that republish content from Wikipedia: two prominent ones, that also include content from other reference sources, are Reference.com and Answers.com. Another example is Wapedia, which began to display Wikipedia content in a mobile-device-friendly format before Wikipedia itself did. Mobile apps – A variety of mobile apps provide access to Wikipedia on hand-held devices, including both Android and iOS devices (see Wikipedia apps). (See also Mobile access.) Search engines – Some web search engines make special use of Wikipedia content when displaying search results: examples include Bing (via technology gained from Powerset)[280] and DuckDuckGo. Compact discs, DVDs – Collections of Wikipedia articles have been published on optical discs. An English version, 2006 Wikipedia CD Selection, contained about 2,000 articles.[281][282] The Polish-language version contains nearly 240,000 articles.[283] There are German- and Spanish-language versions as well.[284][285] Also, "Wikipedia for Schools", the Wikipedia series of CDs / DVDs produced by Wikipedians and SOS Children, is a free, hand-checked, non-commercial selection from Wikipedia targeted around the UK National Curriculum and intended to be useful for much of the English-speaking world.[286] The project is available online; an equivalent print encyclopedia would require roughly 20 volumes. Printed books – There are efforts to put a select subset of Wikipedia's articles into printed book form.[287][288] Since 2009, tens of thousands of print-on-demand books that reproduced English, German, Russian and French Wikipedia articles have been produced by the American company Books LLC and by three Mauritian subsidiaries of the German publisher VDM.[289] Semantic Web – The website DBpedia, begun in 2007, extracts data from the infoboxes and category declarations of the English-language Wikipedia. Wikimedia has created the Wikidata project with a similar objective of storing the basic facts from each page of Wikipedia and the other WMF wikis and make it available in a queriable semantic format, RDF. This is still under development. As of Feb 2014 it has 15,000,000 items and 1,000 properties for describing them. Obtaining the full contents of Wikipedia for reuse presents challenges, since direct cloning via a web crawler is discouraged.[290] Wikipedia publishes "dumps" of its contents, but these are text-only; as of 2007[update] there was no dump available of Wikipedia's images.[291] Several languages of Wikipedia also maintain a reference desk, where volunteers answer questions from the general public. According to a study by Pnina Shachaf in the Journal of Documentation, the quality of the Wikipedia reference desk is comparable to a standard library reference desk, with an accuracy of 55%.[292] Mobile access See also: Help:Mobile access The mobile version of the English Wikipedia's main page Wikipedia's original medium was for users to read and edit content using any standard web browser through a fixed Internet connection. Although Wikipedia content has been accessible through the mobile web since July 2013, The New York Times on February 9, 2014, quoted Erik Möller, deputy director of the Wikimedia Foundation, stating that the transition of internet traffic from desktops to mobile devices was significant and a cause for concern and worry.[16] The article in The New York Times reported the comparison statistics for mobile edits stating that, "Only 20 percent of the readership of the English-language Wikipedia comes via mobile devices, a figure substantially lower than the percentage of mobile traffic for other media sites, many of which approach 50 percent. And the shift to mobile editing has lagged even more."[16] The New York Times reports that Möller has assigned "a team of 10 software developers focused on mobile", out of a total of approximately 200 employees working at the Wikimedia Foundation. One principal concern cited by The New York Times for the "worry" is for Wikipedia to effectively address attrition issues with the number of editors which the online encyclopedia attracts to edit and maintain its content in a mobile access environment.[16] Bloomberg Businessweek reported in July 2014 that Google's Android mobile apps have dominated the largest share of global smartphone shipments for 2013 with 78.6% of market share over their next closest competitor in iOS with 15.2% of the market.[293] At the time of the Tretikov appointment and her posted web interview with Sue Gardner in May 2014, Wikimedia representatives made a technical announcement concerning the number of mobile access systems in the market seeking access to Wikipedia. Directly after the posted web interview, the representatives stated that Wikimedia would be applying an all-inclusive approach to accommodate as many mobile access systems as possible in its efforts for expanding general mobile access, including BlackBerry and the Windows Phone system, making market share a secondary issue.[231] The latest version of the Android app for Wikipedia was released on July 23, 2014, to generally positive reviews, scoring over four of a possible five in a poll of approximately 200,000 users downloading from Google.[294] The latest version for iOS was released on April 3, 2013, to similar reviews.[295] Access to Wikipedia from mobile phones was possible as early as 2004, through the Wireless Application Protocol (WAP), via the Wapedia service. In June 2007 Wikipedia launched en.mobile.wikipedia.org, an official website for wireless devices. In 2009 a newer mobile service was officially released,[296] located at en.m.wikipedia.org, which caters to more advanced mobile devices such as the iPhone, Android-based devices or WebOS-based devices. Several other methods of mobile access to Wikipedia have emerged. Many devices and applications optimize or enhance the display of Wikipedia content for mobile devices, while some also incorporate additional features such as use of Wikipedia metadata (See Wikipedia:Metadata), such as geoinformation.[297][298] Wikipedia Zero is an initiative of the Wikimedia Foundation to expand the reach of the encyclopedia to the developing countries.[299] Andrew Lih and Andrew Brown both maintain editing Wikipedia with smart phones is difficult and this discourages new potential contributors. Several years running the number of Wikipedia editors has been falling and Tom Simonite of MIT Technology Review claims the bureaucratic structure and rules are a factor in this. Simonite alleges some Wikipedians use the labyrinthine rules and guidelines to dominate others and those editors have a vested interest in keeping the status quo.[50] Lih alleges there is serious disagreement among existing contributors how to resolve this. Lih fears for Wikipedia's long term future while Brown fears problems with Wikipedia will remain and rival encyclopedias will not replace it.[300][301] Cultural impact Readership Wikipedia is extremely popular. In February 2014, The New York Times reported that Wikipedia is ranked fifth globally among all websites, stating "With 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors a month […] Wikipedia trails just Yahoo, Facebook, Microsoft and Google, the largest with 1.2 billion unique visitors."[16] In addition to logistic growth in the number of its articles,[302] Wikipedia has steadily gained status as a general reference website since its inception in 2001.[303] About 50% of search engine traffic to Wikipedia comes from Google,[304] a good portion of which is related to academic research.[305] The number of readers of Wikipedia worldwide reached 365 million at the end of 2009.[306] The Pew Internet and American Life project found that one third of US Internet users consulted Wikipedia.[307] In 2011 Business Insider gave Wikipedia a valuation of $4 billion if it ran advertisements.[308] According to "Wikipedia Readership Survey 2011", the average age of Wikipedia readers is 36, with a rough parity between genders. Almost half of Wikipedia readers visit the site more than five times a month, and a similar number of readers specifically look for Wikipedia in search engine results. About 47% of Wikipedia readers do not realize that Wikipedia is a non-profit organization.[309] Cultural significance Main article: Wikipedia in culture Wikipedia Monument in S?ubice, Poland Wikipedia's content has also been used in academic studies, books, conferences, and court cases.[310][311][312] The Parliament of Canada's website refers to Wikipedia's article on same-sex marriage in the "related links" section of its "further reading" list for the Civil Marriage Act.[313] The encyclopedia's assertions are increasingly used as a source by organizations such as the US federal courts and the World Intellectual Property Organization[314] – though mainly for supporting information rather than information decisive to a case.[315] Content appearing on Wikipedia has also been cited as a source and referenced in some US intelligence agency reports.[316] In December 2008, the scientific journal RNA Biology launched a new section for descriptions of families of RNA molecules and requires authors who contribute to the section to also submit a draft article on the RNA family for publication in Wikipedia.[317] Wikipedia has also been used as a source in journalism,[318][319] often without attribution, and several reporters have been dismissed for plagiarizing from Wikipedia.[320][321][322] In 2006, Time magazine recognized Wikipedia's participation (along with YouTube, Reddit, MySpace, and Facebook[323]) in the rapid growth of online collaboration and interaction by millions of people worldwide. In July 2007 Wikipedia was the focus of a 30-minute documentary on BBC Radio 4[324] which argued that, with increased usage and awareness, the number of references to Wikipedia in popular culture is such that the word is one of a select band of 21st-century nouns that are so familiar (Google, Facebook, YouTube) that they no longer need explanation. On September 28, 2007, Italian politician Franco Grillini raised a parliamentary question with the minister of cultural resources and activities about the necessity of freedom of panorama. He said that the lack of such freedom forced Wikipedia, "the seventh most consulted website", to forbid all images of modern Italian buildings and art, and claimed this was hugely damaging to tourist revenues.[325] Play media Wikipedia, an introduction – Erasmus Prize 2015 Jimmy Wales receiving the Quadriga A Mission of Enlightenment award On September 16, 2007, The Washington Post reported that Wikipedia had become a focal point in the 2008 US election campaign, saying: "Type a candidate's name into Google, and among the first results is a Wikipedia page, making those entries arguably as important as any ad in defining a candidate. Already, the presidential entries are being edited, dissected and debated countless times each day."[326] An October 2007 Reuters article, titled "Wikipedia page the latest status symbol", reported the recent phenomenon of how having a Wikipedia article vindicates one's notability.[327] Active participation also has an impact. Law students have been assigned to write Wikipedia articles as an exercise in clear and succinct writing for an uninitiated audience.[328] A working group led by Peter Stone (formed as a part of the Stanford-based project One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence) in its report called Wikipedia "the best-known example of crowdsourcing... that far exceeds traditionally-compiled information sources, such as encyclopedias and dictionaries, in scale and depth."[329] Awards Wikipedia team visiting to Parliament of Asturias Wikipedians meeting after the Asturias awards ceremony Wikipedia won two major awards in May 2004.[330] The first was a Golden Nica for Digital Communities of the annual Prix Ars Electronica contest; this came with a €10,000 (£6,588; $12,700) grant and an invitation to present at the PAE Cyberarts Festival in Austria later that year. The second was a Judges' Webby Award for the "community" category.[331] Wikipedia was also nominated for a "Best Practices" Webby award. In 2007, readers of brandchannel.com voted Wikipedia as the fourth-highest brand ranking, receiving 15% of the votes in answer to the question "Which brand had the most impact on our lives in 2006?"[332] In September 2008, Wikipedia received Quadriga A Mission of Enlightenment award of Werkstatt Deutschland along with Boris Tadi?, Eckart Höfling, and Peter Gabriel. The award was presented to Wales by David Weinberger.[333] In 2015, Wikipedia was awarded both the annual Erasmus Prize, which recognizes exceptional contributions to culture, society or social sciences,[334] and the Spanish Princess of Asturias Award on International Cooperation.[335] Speaking at the Asturian Parliament in Oviedo, the city that hosts the awards ceremony, Jimmy Wales praised the work of the Asturian language Wikipedia users.[336] The night of the ceremony, members of the Wikimedia Foundation held a meeting with Wikipedians from all parts of Spain, including the local Asturian community. Satire See also: Category:Parodies of Wikipedia. Many parodies target Wikipedia's openness and susceptibility to inserted inaccuracies, with characters vandalizing or modifying the online encyclopedia project's articles. Comedian Stephen Colbert has parodied or referenced Wikipedia on numerous episodes of his show The Colbert Report and coined the related term wikiality, meaning "together we can create a reality that we all agree on—the reality we just agreed on".[177] Another example can be found in "Wikipedia Celebrates 750 Years of American Independence", a July 2006 front-page article in The Onion,[337] as well as the 2010 The Onion article "'L.A. Law' Wikipedia Page Viewed 874 Times Today".[338] In an episode of the television comedy The Office U.S., which aired in April 2007, an incompetent office manager (Michael Scott) is shown relying on a hypothetical Wikipedia article for information on negotiation tactics in order to assist him in negotiating lesser pay for an employee.[339] The tactics he used failed, as a joke about the unreliability of Wikipedia and what anyone can do to change its contents. Viewers of the show tried to add the episode's mention of the page as a section of the actual Wikipedia article on negotiation, but this effort was prevented by other users on the article's talk page.[340] "My Number One Doctor", a 2007 episode of the television show Scrubs, played on the perception that Wikipedia is an unreliable reference tool with a scene in which Dr. Perry Cox reacts to a patient who says that a Wikipedia article indicates that the raw food diet reverses the effects of bone cancer by retorting that the same editor who wrote that article also wrote the Battlestar Galactica episode guide.[341] In 2008, the comedic website CollegeHumor produced a video sketch named "Professor Wikipedia", in which the fictitious Professor Wikipedia instructs a class with a medley of unverifiable and occasionally absurd statements.[342] The Dilbert comic strip from May 8, 2009, features a character supporting an improbable claim by saying "Give me ten minutes and then check Wikipedia."[343] In July 2009, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a comedy series called Bigipedia, which was set on a website which was a parody of Wikipedia. Some of the sketches were directly inspired by Wikipedia and its articles.[344] In 2010, comedian Daniel Tosh encouraged viewers of his show, Tosh.0, to visit the show's Wikipedia article and edit it at will. On a later episode, he commented on the edits to the article, most of them offensive, which had been made by the audience and had prompted the article to be locked from editing.[345][346] On August 23, 2013, the New Yorker website published a cartoon with this caption: "Dammit, Manning, have you considered the pronoun war that this is going to start on your Wikipedia page?"[347] In December 2015, John Julius Norwich stated, in a letter published in The Times newspaper, that as an historian he resorted to Wikipedia "at least a dozen times a day", and had never yet caught it out. He described it as "a work of reference as useful as any in existence", with so wide a range that it is almost impossible to find a person, place or thing that it has left uncovered, and that he could never have written his last two books without it.[348][349] Sister projects – Wikimedia Main article: Wikimedia project Wikipedia has also spawned several sister projects, which are also wikis run by the Wikimedia Foundation. These other Wikimedia projects include Wiktionary, a dictionary project launched in December 2002,[350] Wikiquote, a collection of quotations created a week after Wikimedia launched, Wikibooks, a collection of collaboratively written free textbooks and annotated texts, Wikimedia Commons, a site devoted to free-knowledge multimedia, Wikinews, for citizen journalism, and Wikiversity, a project for the creation of free learning materials and the provision of online learning activities.[351] Of these, only Commons has had success comparable to that of Wikipedia. Another sister project of Wikipedia, Wikispecies, is a catalogue of species. In 2012 Wikivoyage, an editable travel guide, and Wikidata, an editable knowledge base, launched. Publishing A group of Wikimedians of the Wikimedia DC chapter at the 2013 DC Wikimedia annual meeting standing in front of the Encyclopædia Britannica (back left) at the US National Archives The most obvious economic effect of Wikipedia has been the death of commercial encyclopedias, especially the printed versions, e.g. Encyclopædia Britannica, which were unable to compete with a product that is essentially free.[352][353][354] Nicholas Carr wrote a 2005 essay, "The amorality of Web 2.0", that criticized websites with user-generated content, like Wikipedia, for possibly leading to professional (and, in his view, superior) content producers' going out of business, because "free trumps quality all the time". Carr wrote: "Implicit in the ecstatic visions of Web 2.0 is the hegemony of the amateur. I for one can't imagine anything more frightening."[355] Others dispute the notion that Wikipedia, or similar efforts, will entirely displace traditional publications. For instance, Chris Anderson, the editor-in-chief of Wired Magazine, wrote in Nature that the "wisdom of crowds" approach of Wikipedia will not displace top scientific journals, with their rigorous peer review process.[356] There is also an ongoing debate about the influence of Wikipedia on the biography publishing business. "The worry is that, if you can get all that information from Wikipedia, what's left for biography?" said Kathryn Hughes, professor of life writing at UEA and author of The Short Life and Long Times of Mrs Beeton and George Eliot: the Last Victorian.[357] Scientific use Wikipedia has seen been widely used as a corpus for linguistic research in computational linguistics, information retrieval and natural language processing. In particular, it commonly serves as a target knowledge base for the entity linking problem, which is then called "wikification",[358] and to the related problem of word sense disambiguation.[359] Methods similar to wikification can in turn be used to find "missing" links in Wikipedia.[360] In 2015, French researchers Dr José Lages of the University of Franche-Comté in Besançon and Dima Shepelyansky of Paul Sabatier University in Toulouse published a global university ranking based on Wikipedia scholarly citations.[361][362][363] They used PageRank "followed by the number of appearances in the 24 different language editions of Wikipedia (descending order) and the century in which they were founded (ascending order)."[363] Related projects A number of interactive multimedia encyclopedias incorporating entries written by the public existed long before Wikipedia was founded. The first of these was the 1986 BBC Domesday Project, which included text (entered on BBC Micro computers) and photographs from over 1 million contributors in the UK, and covered the geography, art, and culture of the UK. This was the first interactive multimedia encyclopedia (and was also the first major multimedia document connected through internal links), with the majority of articles being accessible through an interactive map of the UK. The user interface and part of the content of the Domesday Project were emulated on a website until 2008.[364] Several free-content, collaborative encyclopedias were created around the same period as Wikipedia (e.g. Everything2),[365] with many later being merged into the project (e.g. GNE).[366] One of the most successful early online encyclopedias incorporating entries by the public was h2g2, which was created by Douglas Adams in 1999. The h2g2 encyclopedia is relatively light-hearted, focusing on articles which are both witty and informative. Subsequent collaborative knowledge websites have drawn inspiration from Wikipedia. Some, such as Susning.nu, Enciclopedia Libre, Hudong, and Baidu Baike likewise employ no formal review process, although some like Conservapedia are not as open. Others use more traditional peer review, such as Encyclopedia of Life and the online wiki encyclopedias Scholarpedia and Citizendium. The latter was started by Sanger in an attempt to create a reliable alternative to Wikipedia.[367][368] See also Internet portal Outline of Wikipedia – guide to the subject of Wikipedia presented as a tree structured list of its subtopics; for an outline of the contents of Wikipedia, see Portal:Contents/Outlines Conflict-of-interest editing on Wikipedia Democratization of knowledge Interpedia, an early proposal for a collaborative Internet encyclopedia List of Internet encyclopedias Network effect Print Wikipedia art project to visualize how big Wikipedia is. In cooperation with Wikimedia foundation. QRpedia – multilingual, mobile interface to Wikipedia Wikipedia Review References ^ Sidener, Jonathan (December 6, 2004). "Everyone's Encyclopedia". U-T San Diego. Archived from the original on January 14, 2016. Retrieved October 15, 2006.  ^ Roger Chapman. "Top 40 Website Programming Languages". roadchap.com. Archived from the original on September 22, 2013. Retrieved September 6, 2011.  CS1 maint: Unfit url (link) ^ "Wikipedia founder defends decision to encrypt the site in China". The Verge. Retrieved September 19, 2015.  ^ Bill Tancer (May 1, 2007). "Look Who's Using Wikipedia". Time. Retrieved December 1, 2007. The sheer volume of content […] is partly responsible for the site's dominance as an online reference. When compared to the top 3,200 educational reference sites in the US, Wikipedia is No. 1, capturing 24.3% of all visits to the category . Cf. Bill Tancer (Global Manager, Hitwise), "Wikipedia, Search and School Homework" Archived March 25, 2012, at the Wayback Machine., Hitwise, March 1, 2007. ^ Alex Woodson (July 8, 2007). "Wikipedia remains go-to site for online news". Reuters. Retrieved December 16, 2007. Online encyclopedia Wikipedia has added about 20 million unique monthly visitors in the past year, making it the top online news and information destination, according to Nielsen//NetRatings.  ^ "comScore MMX Ranks Top 50 US Web Properties for August 2012". comScore. September 12, 2012. Retrieved February 6, 2013.  ^ a b c "How popular is wikipedia.org?". Alexa Internet. May 22, 2016. Retrieved September 4, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia pornography row deepens as Wales cedes rights – BBC News". BBC. Retrieved June 28, 2016.  ^ "The Mysterious Workings of Wikis: Who Owns What?". Ecommercetimes.com. Retrieved June 28, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation employee ousted over paid editing". Ars Technica. Retrieved June 28, 2016.  ^ a b Kock, N., Jung, Y., & Syn, T. (2016). Wikipedia and e-Collaboration Research: Opportunities and Challenges. Archived September 27, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. International Journal of e-Collaboration (IJeC), 12(2), 1–8. ^ Mike Miliard (March 1, 2008). "Wikipediots: Who Are These Devoted, Even Obsessive Contributors to Wikipedia?". Salt Lake City Weekly. Retrieved December 18, 2008.  ^ Sidener, Jonathan (October 9, 2006). "Wikipedia family feud rooted in San Diego". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Archived from the original on November 11, 2016. Retrieved May 5, 2009.  ^ "Wiki" in the Hawaiian Dictionary, revised and enlarged edition, University of Hawaii Press, 1986 ^ "Wikipedia cofounder Jimmy Wales on 60 Minutes". CBS News. Retrieved April 6, 2015.  ^ a b c d e f Cohen, Noam (February 9, 2014). "Wikipedia vs. the Small Screen". The New York Times.  ^ "Comparing featured article groups and revision patterns correlations in Wikipedia". First Monday. Retrieved July 13, 2010.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin Wattenberg; Matthew M. McKeon (July 22, 2007). "The Hidden Order of Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved October 30, 2007.  ^ a b Jim Giles (December 2005). "Internet encyclopedias go head to head". Nature. 438 (7070): 900–901. Bibcode:2005Natur.438..900G. doi:10.1038/438900a. PMID 16355180. (subscription required) Note: The study was cited in several news articles; e.g.: "Wikipedia survives research test". BBC News. December 15, 2005.  ^ a b c Black, Edwin (April 19, 2010) Wikipedia – The Dumbing Down of World Knowledge Archived September 9, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., History News Network Retrieved October 21, 2014 ^ a b J. Petrilli, Michael (SPRING 2008/Vol.8, No.2) Wikipedia or Wickedpedia? Archived November 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., Education Next Retrieved October 22, 2014 ^ "The contribution conundrum: Why did Wikipedia succeed while other encyclopedias failed?". Nieman Lab. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Richard M. Stallman (June 20, 2007). "The Free Encyclopedia Project". Free Software Foundation. Retrieved January 4, 2008.  ^ Jonathan Sidener (December 6, 2004). "Everyone's Encyclopedia". U-T San Diego. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved October 15, 2006.  ^ Meyers, Peter (September 20, 2001). "Fact-Driven? Collegial? This Site Wants You". The New York Times. Retrieved November 22, 2007. 'I can start an article that will consist of one paragraph, and then a real expert will come along and add three paragraphs and clean up my one paragraph,' said Larry Sanger of Las Vegas, who founded Wikipedia with Mr. Wales.  ^ a b c Sanger, Larry (April 18, 2005). "The Early History of Nupedia and Wikipedia: A Memoir". Slashdot. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Sanger, Larry (January 17, 2001). "Wikipedia Is Up!". Archived from the original on May 6, 2001. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia-l: LinkBacks?". Retrieved February 20, 2007.  ^ Sanger, Larry (January 10, 2001). "Let's Make a Wiki". Internet Archive. Archived from the original on April 14, 2003. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia: HomePage". Archived from the original on March 31, 2001. Retrieved March 31, 2001.  ^ "Wikipedia:Neutral point of view, Wikipedia (January 21, 2007). ^ Finkelstein, Seth (September 25, 2008). "Read me first: Wikipedia isn't about human potential, whatever Wales says". London: The Guardian.  ^ "Wikipedia, August 8, 2001". Web.archive.bibalex.org. August 8, 2001. Archived from the original on July 27, 2001. Retrieved March 3, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia, September 25, 2001". Web.archive.bibalex.org. Archived from the original on March 31, 2001. Retrieved March 3, 2014.  ^ "Multilingual statistics". Wikipedia. March 30, 2005. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Encyclopedias and Dictionaries". Encyclopædia Britannica. 18 (15th ed.). 2007. pp. 257–286.  ^ "[long] Enciclopedia Libre: msg#00008". Osdir. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Clay Shirky (February 28, 2008). Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing Without Organizations. The Penguin Press via Amazon Online Reader. p. 273. ISBN 1-59420-153-6. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Bobbie Johnson (August 12, 2009). "Wikipedia approaches its limits". The Guardian. London. Retrieved March 31, 2010.  ^ Wikipedia:Modelling_Wikipedia_extended_growth ^ The Singularity is Not Near: Slowing Growth of Wikipedia (PDF). The International Symposium on Wikis. Orlando, Florida. 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 11, 2011.  ^ Evgeny Morozov (November–December 2009). "Edit This Page; Is it the end of Wikipedia". Boston Review.  ^ Cohen, Noam (March 28, 2009). "Wikipedia – Exploring Fact City". The New York Times. Retrieved April 19, 2011.  ^ Austin Gibbons, David Vetrano, Susan Biancani (2012). Wikipedia: Nowhere to grow ^ Jenny Kleeman (November 26, 2009). "Wikipedia falling victim to a war of words". The Guardian. London. Retrieved March 31, 2010.  ^ "Wikipedia: A quantitative analysis". Archived from the original (PDF) on April 3, 2012.  ^ Volunteers Log Off as Wikipedia Ages, The Wall Street Journal, November 27, 2009. ^ Barnett, Emma (November 26, 2009). "Wikipedia's Jimmy Wales denies site is 'losing' thousands of volunteer editors". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved March 31, 2010.  ^ a b Kevin Rawlinson (August 8, 2011). "Wikipedia seeks women to balance its 'geeky' editors". The Independent. Retrieved April 5, 2012.  ^ a b c d e Simonite, Tom (October 22, 2013). "The Decline of Wikipedia". MIT Technology Review. Retrieved November 30, 2013.  ^ "3 Charts That Show How Wikipedia Is Running Out of Admins". The Atlantic. July 16, 2012.  ^ Ward, Katherine. New York Magazine, issue of November 25, 2013, p. 18. ^ "Wikipedia Breaks Into US Top 10 Sites". PCWorld. February 17, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedia.org Site Overview". alexa.com. Retrieved December 4, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia Traffic Analysis Report – Wikipedia Page Views Per Country". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 8, 2015.  ^ Netburn, Deborah (January 19, 2012). "Wikipedia: SOPA protest led 8 million to look up reps in Congress". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved March 6, 2012.  ^ "Wikipedia joins blackout protest at US anti-piracy moves". BBC News. January 18, 2012. Retrieved January 19, 2012.  ^ "SOPA/Blackoutpage". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved January 19, 2012.  ^ Jeff Loveland and Joseph Reagle (January 15, 2013). "Wikipedia and encyclopedic production. New Media & Society. Sage Journals". New Media & Society. 15 (8): 1294. doi:10.1177/1461444812470428.  ^ Rebecca J. Rosen (January 30, 2013). "What If the Great Wikipedia 'Revolution' Was Actually a Reversion? • The Atlantic". Retrieved February 9, 2013.  ^ a b c Varma, Subodh (January 20, 2014). "Google eating into Wikipedia page views?". The Economic Times. Times Internet Limited. Retrieved February 10, 2014.  ^ "Alexa Top 500 Global Sites". Alexa Internet. Retrieved December 28, 2016.  ^ a b "Wikipedia Statistics (English)". stats.wikimedia.org.  ^ a b Zittrain, Jonathan (2008). The Future of the Internet and How to Stop It – Chapter 6: The Lessons of Wikipedia. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-12487-3. Archived from the original on February 16, 2009. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Registration notes ^ Protection Policy ^ Hafner, Katie (June 17, 2006). "Growing Wikipedia Refines Its 'Anyone Can Edit' Policy". The New York Times. Retrieved December 5, 2016.  ^ English Wikipedia's protection policy ^ English Wikipedia's full protection policy ^ a b Birken, P. (December 14, 2008). "Bericht Gesichtete Versionen". Wikide-l (Mailing list) (in German). Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved February 15, 2009.  ^ William Henderson (December 10, 2012). "Wikipedia Has Figured Out A New Way To Stop Vandals In Their Tracks". Business Insider.  ^ Frewin, Jonathan (June 15, 2010). "Wikipedia unlocks divisive pages for editing". BBC News. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ a b Kleinz, Torsten (February 2005). "World of Knowledge" (PDF). Linux Magazine. Retrieved July 13, 2007. The Wikipedia's open structure makes it a target for trolls and vandals who malevolently add incorrect information to articles, get other people tied up in endless discussions, and generally do everything to draw attention to themselves.  ^ Wikipedia:New pages patrol ^ Andrea Ciffolilli, "Phantom authority, self-selective recruitment and retention of members in virtual communities: The case of Wikipedia" Archived December 6, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., First Monday December 2003. ^ West, Andrew G.; Chang, Jian; Venkatasubramanian, Krishna; Sokolsky, Oleg; Lee, Insup (2011). Link Spamming Wikipedia for Profit. 8th Annual Collaboration, Electronic Messaging, Anti-Abuse, and Spam Conference. pp. 152–161. doi:10.1145/2030376.2030394.  ^ Vandalism. Wikipedia. Retrieved November 6, 2012. ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin Wattenberg; Kushal Dave (2004). "Studying Cooperation and Conflict between Authors with History Flow Visualizations" (PDF). Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI). Vienna, Austria: ACM SIGCHI: 575–582. doi:10.1145/985921.985953. ISBN 1-58113-702-8. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 25, 2006. Retrieved January 24, 2007.  ^ Reid Priedhorsky; Jilin Chen; Shyong (Tony) K. Lam; Katherine Panciera; Loren Terveen; John Riedl (November 4, 2007). "Creating, Destroying, and Restoring Value in Wikipedia" (PDF). Association for Computing Machinery GROUP '07 conference proceedings; GroupLens Research, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota. Sanibel Island, Florida. Retrieved October 13, 2007.  ^ a b c d Seigenthaler, John (November 29, 2005). "A False Wikipedia 'biography'". USA Today. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Friedman, Thomas L. (2007). The World is Flat. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. p. 124. ISBN 978-0-374-29278-2.  ^ Buchanan, Brian (November 17, 2006). "Founder shares cautionary tale of libel in cyberspace". archive.firstamendmentcenter.org. Archived from the original on December 21, 2012. Retrieved November 17, 2012.  ^ Helm, Burt (December 13, 2005). "Wikipedia: "A Work in Progress"". BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012. Retrieved July 26, 2012.  ^ "Who's behind Wikipedia?". PC World. February 6, 2008. Archived from the original on February 9, 2008. Retrieved February 7, 2008.  ^ What Wikipedia is not. Retrieved April 1, 2010. "Wikipedia is not a dictionary, usage, or jargon guide." ^ Notability. Retrieved February 13, 2008. "A topic is presumed to be notable if it has received significant coverage in reliable secondary sources that are independent of the subject." ^ No original research. February 13, 2008. "Wikipedia does not publish original thought." ^ Verifiability. February 13, 2008. "Material challenged or likely to be challenged, and all quotations, must be attributed to a reliable, published source." ^ Cohen, Noam (August 9, 2011). "For inclusive mission, Wikipedia is told that written word goes only so far". International Herald Tribune. p. 18. Archived from the original on March 11, 2014 – via vLex. (subscription required) ^ Neutral point of view. February 13, 2008. "All Wikipedia articles and other encyclopedic content must be written from a neutral point of view, representing significant views fairly, proportionately and without bias." ^ Eric Haas (October 26, 2007). "Will Unethical Editing Destroy Wikipedia's Credibility?". AlterNet. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Sanger, Larry (April 18, 2005). "The Early History of Nupedia and Wikipedia: A Memoir". Slashdot. Dice.  ^ Kostakis, Vasilis (March 2010). "Identifying and understanding the problems of Wikipedia's peer governance: The case of inclusionists versus deletionists". First Monday.  ^ Ownership of articles ^ Avoiding Tragedy in the Wiki-Commons, by Andrew George, 12 Va. J.L. & Tech. 8 (2007) ^ Wikipedia:Administrators ^ Mehegan, David (February 13, 2006). "Many contributors, common cause". Boston Globe. Retrieved March 25, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedia:Administrators". Retrieved July 12, 2009.  ^ "Wikipedia:RfA_Review/Reflect". Retrieved September 24, 2009.  ^ Meyer, Robinson (July 16, 2012). "3 Charts That Show How Wikipedia Is Running Out of Admins". The Atlantic. Retrieved September 2, 2012.  ^ Dispute Resolution ^ Coldewey, Devin (June 21, 2012). "Wikipedia is editorial warzone, says study". Technology. NBC News. Retrieved October 29, 2012.  ^ David A. Hoffman; Salil K. Mehra (2009). "Wikitruth through Wikiorder". Emory Law Journal (PDF)|format= requires |url= (help). Emory University School of Law. 59 (1): 181. SSRN 1354424.  ^ David A. Hoffman; Salil K. Mehra (2009). "Wikitruth through Wikiorder". Emory Law Journal (PDF)|format= requires |url= (help). Emory University School of Law. 59 (1): 151–210. SSRN 1354424.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin M. Wattenberg; Jesse Kriss; Frank van Ham (January 3, 2007). "Talk Before You Type: Coordination in Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved June 27, 2008.  ^ Arthur, Charles (December 15, 2005). "Log on and join in, but beware the web cults". The Guardian. London. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Lu Stout, Kristie (August 4, 2003). "Wikipedia: The know-it-all Web site". CNN. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Larry Sanger (December 31, 2004). "Why Wikipedia Must Jettison Its Anti-Elitism". Kuro5hin, Op–Ed. There is a certain mindset associated with unmoderated Usenet groups […] that infects the collectively-managed Wikipedia project: if you react strongly to trolling, that reflects poorly on you, not (necessarily) on the troll. If you […] demand that something be done about constant disruption by trollish behavior, the other listmembers will cry "censorship", attack you, and even come to the defense of the troll. […] The root problem: anti-elitism, or lack of respect for expertise. There is a deeper problem […] which explains both of the above-elaborated problems. Namely, as a community, Wikipedia lacks the habit or tradition of respect for expertise. As a community, far from being elitist, it is anti-elitist (which, in this context, means that expertise is not accorded any special respect, and snubs and disrespect of expertise is tolerated). This is one of my failures: a policy that I attempted to institute in Wikipedia's first year, but for which I did not muster adequate support, was the policy of respecting and deferring politely to experts. (Those who were there will, I hope, remember that I tried very hard.)  ^ T. Kriplean, I. Beschastnikh, et al. (2008). "Articulations of wikiwork: uncovering valued work in Wikipedia through barnstars". Proceedings of the ACM: 47. doi:10.1145/1460563.1460573. ISBN 978-1-60558-007-4.  (Subscription required.) ^ Jean Goodwin (2009). "The Authority of Wikipedia" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on November 22, 2009. Retrieved January 31, 2011. Wikipedia's commitment to anonymity/pseudonymity thus imposes a sort of epistemic agnosticism on its readers  ^ Kittur, Aniket. "Power of the Few vs. Wisdom of the Crowd: Wikipedia and the Rise of the Bourgeoisie" (PDF). Viktoria Institute. Retrieved August 13, 2014.  ^ a b c Blodget, Henry (January 3, 2009). "Who The Hell Writes Wikipedia, Anyway?". Business Insider.  ^ Wilson, Chris (February 22, 2008). "The Wisdom of the Chaperones". Slate. Retrieved August 13, 2014.  ^ Swartz, Aaron (September 4, 2006). "Raw Thought: Who Writes Wikipedia?". Retrieved February 23, 2008.  ^ a b Goldman, Eric. "Wikipedia's Labor Squeeze and its Consequences". 8. Journal on Telecommunications and High Technology Law.  ^ Noveck, Beth Simone. "Wikipedia and the Future of Legal Education". 57. Journal of Legal Education.  ^ "Wikipedia "Good Samaritans" Are on the Money". Scientific American. October 19, 2007. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Yair Amichai–Hamburger, Naama Lamdan, Rinat Madiel, Tsahi Hayat, Personality Characteristics of Wikipedia Members, CyberPsychology & Behavior, December 1, 2008, 11 (6): 679–681; doi:10.1089/cpb.2007.0225. ^ "Wikipedians are 'closed' and 'disagreeable'". New Scientist. Retrieved July 13, 2010.  (Subscription required.) ^ "The Misunderstood Personality Profile of Wikipedia Members". psychologytoday.com. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Giles, Jim (August 4, 2009). "After the boom, is Wikipedia heading for bust?". New Scientist.  ^ "Where Are the Women in Wikipedia? – Room for Debate". NYTimes.com. February 2, 2011. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Lam, Shyong; Anuradha Uduwage; Zhenhua Dong; Shilad Sen; David R. Musicant; Loren Terveen; John Riedl (October 3–5, 2011). "WP:Clubhouse? An Exploration of Wikipedia's Gender Imbalance" (PDF). WikiSym 2011. Retrieved October 28, 2013.  ^ Cohen, Noam. "Define Gender Gap? Look Up Wikipedia's Contributor List". The New York Times. The New York Times Company. Retrieved October 28, 2013.  ^ Chom, Noam (January 31, 2011). "Define Gender Gap? Look Up Wikipedia's Contributor List". The New York Times. p. B–1. Retrieved May 9, 2012.  ^ Basch, Linda (February 6, 2011). "Male-Dominated Web Site Seeking Female Experts" (Letters to the Editor). The New York Times. p. WK–7. Retrieved May 9, 2012.  ^ "OCAD to 'Storm Wikipedia' this fall". CBC News. August 27, 2013. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ Wikimedia Foundation. 2008. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on November 18, 2016. Retrieved December 27, 2016.  ^ "Wikipedia 'completely failed' to fix gender imbalance". BBC News. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Dimitra Kessenides (December 26, 2017). Bloomberg News Weekly, "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". p. 73. ^ "Statistics". English Wikipedia. Retrieved June 21, 2008.  ^ List of Wikipedias ^ "Wikipedia:List of Wikipedias". English Wikipedia. Retrieved April 26, 2017.  ^ List of Wikipedias – Meta ^ "List of Wikipedias". Wikimedia Meta-Wiki. Retrieved 26 April 2017.  ^ "Spelling". Manual of Style. Wikipedia. Retrieved May 19, 2007.  ^ "Countering systemic bias". Retrieved May 19, 2007.  ^ "Fair use". Meta-Wiki. Retrieved July 14, 2007.  ^ "Images on Wikipedia". Retrieved July 14, 2007.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas (January 3, 2007). "The Visual Side of Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved October 30, 2007.  ^ Jimmy Wales, "Wikipedia is an encyclopedia", March 8, 2005, <Wikipedia-l@wikimedia.org> ^ "Meta-Wiki". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 24, 2009.  ^ "Meta-Wiki Statistics". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 24, 2008.  ^ "List of articles every Wikipedia should have". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 24, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia: Translation". English Wikipedia. Retrieved February 3, 2007.  ^ Yasseri, Taha; Sumi, Robert; Kertész, János (January 17, 2012). "Circadian Patterns of Wikipedia Editorial Activity: A Demographic Analysis". PLoS ONE. 7 (1): e30091. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0030091. Retrieved January 17, 2012.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation 2011–12 Annual Plan" (PDF). Wikimedia Foundation. p. 8. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ a b c "The future of Wikipedia: WikiPeaks?". The Economist. March 1, 2014. Retrieved March 11, 2014.  ^ Andrew Lih. Wikipedia. Alternative edit policies at Wikipedia in other languages. ^ Jemielniak, Dariusz (June 22, 2014). "The Unbearable Bureaucracy of Wikipedia". Slate. Retrieved August 18, 2014.  ^ D. Jemielniak, Common Knowledge, Stanford University Press, 2014. ^ Messer-Kruse, Timothy (February 12, 2012) The 'Undue Weight' of Truth on Wikipedia Archived December 18, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. The Chronicle of Higher Education Retrieved March 27, 2014 ^ Colón-Aguirre, Monica &Fleming-May, Rachel A. (October 11, 2012) "You Just Type in What You Are Looking For": Undergraduates' Use of Library Resources vs. Wikipedia Archived April 19, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. (p. 392) The Journal of Academic Librarianship Retrieved March 27, 2014 ^ Bowling Green News (February 27, 2012) Wikipedia experience sparks national debate Archived August 27, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Bowling Green State University Retrieved March 27, 2014 ^ Wisdom? More like dumbness of the crowds | Oliver Kamm – Times Online (archive version 2011-08-14) (Author's own copy Archived September 5, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.) ^ "Plagiarism by Wikipedia editors". Wikipedia Watch. October 27, 2006. Archived from the original on November 25, 2009.  ^ "Wikipedia, Britannica: A Toss-Up". Wired. Associated Press. December 15, 2005. Retrieved August 8, 2015.  ^ Reagle, pp. 165–166. ^ Fatally Flawed: Refuting the recent study on encyclopedic accuracy by the journal Nature Archived July 9, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., Encyclopædia Britannica, March 2006 ^ "Encyclopaedia Britannica and Nature: a response" (PDF). Retrieved July 13, 2010.  ^ "Nature's responses to Encyclopaedia Britannica". Nature. March 30, 2006. Retrieved March 19, 2012.  ^ See author acknowledged comments in response to the citation of the Nature study, at PLoS One, 2014, "Citation of fundamentally flawed Nature quality 'study' ", In response to T. Yasseri et al. (2012) Dynamics of Conflicts in Wikipedia, Published June 20, 2012, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0038869, see "Archived copy". Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2014. , accessed July 21, 2014. ^ "Wikipedia:General disclaimer". English Wikipedia. Retrieved April 22, 2008.  ^ Public Information Research, Wikipedia Watch ^ Raphel, JR. "The 15 Biggest Wikipedia Blunders". PC World. Retrieved September 2, 2009.  ^ Cowen, Tyler (March 14, 2008). "Cooked Books". The New Republic. Archived from the original on March 18, 2008. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Stacy Schiff (July 31, 2006). "Know It All". The New Yorker.  ^ Danah Boyd (January 4, 2005). "Academia and Wikipedia". Many 2 Many: A Group Weblog on Social Software. Corante. Retrieved December 18, 2008. [The author, Danah Boyd, describes herself as] an expert on social media[,] […] a doctoral student in the School of Information at the University of California, Berkeley [,] and a fellow at the Harvard University Berkman Center for Internet & Society [at Harvard Law School.]  ^ Robert McHenry, "The Faith-Based Encyclopedia" Archived January 16, 2006, at the Wayback Machine., Tech Central Station, November 15, 2004. ^ "Inside Wikipedia – Attack of the PR Industry". Deutsche Welle. June 30, 2014. Retrieved July 2, 2014.  ^ "Toward a New Compendium of Knowledge (longer version)". Citizendium. Archived from the original on October 11, 2006. Retrieved October 10, 2006.  ^ a b Elder, Jeff (June 16, 2014). "Wikipedia Strengthens Rules Against Undisclosed Editing". The Wall Street Journal.  ^ Ahrens, Frank (July 9, 2006). "Death by Wikipedia: The Kenneth Lay Chronicles". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 1, 2006.  ^ Kane, Margaret (January 30, 2006). "Politicians notice Wikipedia". CNET. Retrieved January 28, 2007.  ^ Bergstein, Brian (January 23, 2007). "Microsoft offers cash for Wikipedia edit". MSNBC. Retrieved February 1, 2007.  ^ Hafner, Katie (August 19, 2007). "Lifting Corporate Fingerprints From the Editing of Wikipedia". The New York Times. p. 1. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ a b Stephen Colbert (July 30, 2006). "Wikiality". Retrieved October 8, 2015.  ^ "Wide World of Wikipedia". The Emory Wheel. April 21, 2006. Archived from the original on November 7, 2007. Retrieved October 17, 2007.  ^ Waters, N. L. (2007). "Why you can't cite Wikipedia in my class". Communications of the ACM. 50 (9): 15. doi:10.1145/1284621.1284635.  ^ Jaschik, Scott (January 26, 2007). "A Stand Against Wikipedia". Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved January 27, 2007.  ^ Helm, Burt (December 14, 2005). "Wikipedia: 'A Work in Progress'". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on April 21, 2012. Retrieved January 29, 2007.  ^ "Jimmy Wales", Biography Resource Center Online. (Gale, 2006.) ^ Child, Maxwell L., "Professors Split on Wiki Debate" Archived December 20, 2008, at the Wayback Machine., The Harvard Crimson, Monday, February 26, 2007. ^ Chloe Stothart. "Web threatens learning ethos" Archived December 21, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.. The Times Higher Education Supplement, 2007, 1799 (June 22), p. 2. ^ Cohen, Morris; Olson, Kent (2010). Legal Research in a Nutshell (10th ed.). St. Paul, Minnesota, USA: Thomson Reuters. pp. 32–34. ISBN 978-0-314-26408-4.  ^ a b Julie Beck. "Doctors' #1 Source for Healthcare Information: Wikipedia". The Atlantic, March 5, 2014. ^ a b Green, Emma (May 7, 2014). "Can Wikipedia Ever Be a Definitive Medical Text? – Julie Beck". The Atlantic. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Kittur, Aniket; Kraut, Robert E. (2008). "Harnessing the wisdom of crowds in Wikipedia: quality through coordination". Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work. New York: ACM. pp. 37–46. doi:10.1145/1460563.1460572. ISBN 978-1-60558-007-4. [permanent dead link] ^ a b Roy Rosenzweig (June 2006). "Can History be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the Past". The Journal of American History. 93 (1): 117–146. doi:10.2307/4486062. JSTOR 4486062. Archived from the original on April 25, 2010. Retrieved August 11, 2006.  (Center for History and New Media.) ^ Andrew Orlowski (October 18, 2005). "Wikipedia founder admits to serious quality problems". The Register. Retrieved September 30, 2007.  ^ "Cancer information on Wikipedia is accurate, but not very readable, study finds". Science Daily. June 2, 2010. Retrieved December 31, 2010.  ^ "Fact or fiction? Wikipedia's variety of contributors is not only a strength". The Economist. March 10, 2007. Retrieved December 31, 2010.  ^ Wikipedia:PAPER ^ "The battle for Wikipedia's soul". The Economist. March 6, 2008. Retrieved March 7, 2008.  ^ Douglas, Ian (November 10, 2007). "Wikipedia: an online encyclopedia torn apart". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved November 23, 2010.  ^ Sophie Taylor (April 5, 2008). "China allows access to English Wikipedia". Reuters. Retrieved July 29, 2008.  ^ Bruilliard, Karin (May 21, 2010). "Pakistan blocks YouTube a day after shutdown of Facebook over Muhammad issue". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 24, 2011.  ^ "Wikipedia child image censored". BBC News. December 8, 2008. Retrieved December 8, 2008.  ^ a b Kittur, A., Chi, E. H., and Suh, B. 2009. What's in Wikipedia? Mapping Topics and Conflict Using Socially Annotated Category Structure Archived April 13, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. In Proceedings of the 27th international Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Boston, Massachusetts, USA, April 4–9, 2009). CHI '09. ACM, New York, USA, 1509–1512. ^ Petrusich, Amanda (October 20, 2011). "Wikipedia's Deep Dive Into a Library Collection". The New York Times. Retrieved October 28, 2011.  ^ Lam, Shyong; Anuradha Uduwage; Zhenhua Dong; Shilad Sen; David R. Musicant; Loren Terveen; John Riedl (October 3–5, 2011). "WP: Clubhouse? An Exploration of Wikipedia's Gender Imblance" (PDF). WikiSym 2011: 4.  ^ Mark Graham, Mapping the Geographies of Wikipedia Content, Zerogeography.net (November 12, 2009). ^ The Guardian 2014 (London) The Guardian view on Wikipedia: evolving truth Archived November 12, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. ^ a b Quilter, Laura (October 24, 2012). "Systemic Bias in Wikipedia: What It Looks Like, and How to Deal with It". University of Massachusetts – Amherst. Retrieved November 26, 2012.  ^ "Edit Wars Reveal the 10 Most Controversial Topics on Wikipedia[permanent dead link]", MIT Technology Review, July 17, 2013. ^ a b c "The Most Controversial Topics in Wikipedia: A Multilingual and Geographical Analysis by Taha Yasseri, Anselm Spoerri, Mark Graham, Janos Kertesz :: SSRN". Papers.ssrn.com. May 23, 2013. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2269392. SSRN 2269392.  Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ Das, Sanmay; Allen, Lavoie; Malik, Magdon-Ismail (November 1, 2013). "Manipulation among the arbiters of collective intelligence: How Wikipedia administrators mold public opinion". CIKM '13 Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on Information & Knowledge Management. San Francisco, California, USA: ACM. pp. 1097–1106. doi:10.1145/2505515.2505566. ISBN 978-1-4503-2263-8.  ^ Das, Sanmay; Allen, Lavoie; Malik, Magdon-Ismail (December 24, 2016). "Manipulation among the arbiters of collective intelligence: How Wikipedia administrators mold public opinion.". ACM Transactions on the Web. New York, NY, USA: ACM. 10 (4): 24. doi:10.1145/3001937.  ^ a b Dimitra Kessenides (December 22, 2016). "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". Bloomberg News Weekly. p. 72. Retrieved December 26, 2016.  ^ Sanger, Larry. "What should we do about Wikipedia's porn problem?". Retrieved July 26, 2012.  ^ Metz, Cade (December 7, 2008). "Brit ISPs censor Wikipedia over 'child porn' album cover". The Register. Retrieved May 10, 2009.  ^ Raphael, JR (December 10, 2008). "Wikipedia Censorship Sparks Free Speech Debate". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 10, 2009.  ^ Farrell, Nick (April 29, 2010). "Wikipedia denies child abuse allegations: Co-founder grassed the outfit to the FBI". The Inquirer. Retrieved October 9, 2010.  ^ a b Metz, Cade (April 9, 2010). "Wikifounder reports Wikiparent to FBI over 'child porn'". The Register. Retrieved April 19, 2010.  ^ "Wikipedia blasts co-founder's accusations of child porn on website". The Economic Times. India. April 29, 2010. Retrieved April 29, 2010.  ^ a b "Wikipedia blasts talk of child porn at website". Agence France-Presse. April 28, 2010. Retrieved April 29, 2010.  ^ "Wikimedia pornography row deepens as Wales cedes rights". BBC News. May 10, 2010. Retrieved May 19, 2010.  ^ Gray, Lila (September 17, 2013). "Wikipedia Gives Porn a Break". XBIZ.com. Retrieved November 10, 2013.  ^ Andrew McStay, 2014, Privacy and Philosophy: New Media and Affective Protocol Archived April 14, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., New York Peter Lang. ^ Heise – Gericht weist einstweilige Verfügung gegen Wikimedia Deutschland ab (update), by Torsten Kleinz, February 9, 2006. ^ "IT Service Management Software". OTRS.com. Retrieved June 9, 2012.  ^ Paling, Emma. "Wikipedia's Hostility to Women". The Atlantic. Retrieved October 24, 2015.  ^ Auerbach, David. "Encyclopedia Frown". Slate. Retrieved October 24, 2015.  ^ "In UK, rising chorus of outrage over online misogyny". CSMonitor.com.  ^ Paling, Emma (October 21, 2015). "Wikipedia's Hostility to Women". The Atlantic. Retrieved December 10, 2016.  ^ Ayers, Phoebe (2008). How Wikipedia Works. San Francisco: No Starch Press. p. 213. ISBN 1-59327-176-X.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation – Financial Statements – June 30, 2011 and 2010" (PDF). Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation IRS Form 990" (PDF). Retrieved October 14, 2014.  ^ "Press releases/WMF announces new ED Lila Tretikov". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ a b Jeff Elder, The Wall Street Journal, May 1, 2014, "Wikipedia's New Chief: From Soviet Union to World's Sixth-Largest Site". ^ a b Naom Cohen (May 1, 2014). "Media: Open-Source Software Specialist Selected as Executive Director of Wikipedia". The New York Times.  ^ Dimitra Kessenides. Bloomberg News Weekly. December 26, 2016. "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". ^ Dimitra Kessenides. Bloomberg News Weekly. December 26, 2016, p. 74. "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". ^ Mark Bergsma. "Wikimedia Architecture" (PDF). Wikimedia Foundation. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 3, 2009. Retrieved June 27, 2008.  ^ "Version: Installed extensions". . Retrieved August 18, 2014. ^ Michael Snow. "Lucene search: Internal search function returns to service". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved February 26, 2009.  ^ Brion Vibber. "[Wikitech-l] Lucene search". Retrieved February 26, 2009.  ^ "Extension:Lucene-search". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved August 31, 2009.  ^ "mediawiki – Revision 55688: /branches/lucene-search-2.1/lib". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved August 31, 2009.  ^ Emil Protalinski (July 2, 2013). "Wikimedia rolls out WYSIWYG visual editor for logged-in users accessing Wikipedia articles in English". The Next Web. Retrieved July 6, 2013.  ^ Curtis, Sophie (July 23, 2013). "Wikipedia introduces new features to entice editors". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved August 18, 2013.  ^ L.M. (December 13, 2011). "Changes at Wikipedia: Seeing things". The Economist. Retrieved July 28, 2013.  ^ Lucian Parfeni (July 2, 2013). "Wikipedia's New VisualEditor Is the Best Update in Years and You Can Make It Better". Softpedia. Retrieved July 30, 2013.  ^ a b Orlowski, Andrew (August 1, 2013). "Wikipedians say no to Jimmy's 'buggy' WYSIWYG editor". The Register. Retrieved August 18, 2013.  ^ Wikipedia Bot Information ^ a b Daniel Nasaw (July 24, 2012). "Meet the 'bots' that edit Wikipedia". BBC News.  ^ Halliday, Josh; Arthur, Charles (July 26, 2012). "Boot up: The Wikipedia vandalism police, Apple analysts, and more". The Guardian. Retrieved September 5, 2012.  ^ Jervell, Ellen Emmerentze (July 13, 2014). "For This Author, 10,000 Wikipedia Articles Is a Good Day's Work". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 18, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia signpost: Abuse Filter is enabled". English Wikipedia. March 23, 2009. Retrieved July 13, 2010.  ^ Aljazeera, July 21, 2014, "MH17 Wikipedia entry edited from Russian Government IP Address". "Archived copy". Archived from the original on November 16, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2014.  ^ Wikipedia's policy on bots ^ Andrew Lih (2009). The Wikipedia Revolution, chapter Then came the Bots, pp. 99–106. ^ "Wikipedia: Wikiprojects". Retrieved 16 March 2015.  ^ "Wikipedia:Version 1.0 Editorial Team/Assessment". Retrieved 28 October 2007.  ^ "Comparing featured article groups and revision patterns correlations in Wikipedia". First Monday. Retrieved 13 July 2010.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin Wattenberg; Matthew M. McKeon (22 July 2007). "The Hidden Order of Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved 30 October 2007.  ^ Poderi, Giacomo, Wikipedia and the Featured Articles: How a Technological System Can Produce Best Quality Articles, Master thesis, University of Maastricht, October 2008. ^ Lindsey, David (5 April 2010). "Evaluating quality control of Wikipedia's featured articles". First Monday. 15 (4). Retrieved 29 January 2017.  ^ a b Wikipedia:Version 1.0 Editorial Team/Statistics – Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia ^ "Monthly request statistics", Wikimedia. Retrieved October 31, 2008.[dead link] ^ Domas Mituzas. "Wikipedia: Site internals, configuration, code examples and management issues" (PDF). MySQL Users Conference 2007. Retrieved June 27, 2008.  ^ Guido Urdaneta, Guillaume Pierre and Maarten van Steen. "Wikipedia Workload Analysis for Decentralized Hosting". Elsevier Computer Networks 53 (11), pp. 1830–1845, June 2009. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Weiss, Todd R. (October 9, 2008). "Wikipedia simplifies IT infrastructure by moving to one Linux vendor". Computerworld. Retrieved November 1, 2008.  ^ Paul, Ryan (October 9, 2008). "Wikipedia adopts Ubuntu for its server infrastructure". Ars Technica. Retrieved November 1, 2008.  ^ "Server roles at wikitech.wikimedia.org". Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved December 8, 2009.  ^ Palmier, Guillaume. "Wikimedia sites to move to primary data center in Ashburn, Virginia". WMF. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Verge, Jason. "It's Official: Ashburn is Wikipedia's New Home". Data Center Knowledge. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Frederic M. Scherer and David Ross, [1970] 1990. Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance, 3rd ed. Houghton-Mifflin. Description Archived May 3, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. and 1st ed. review extract[dead link].    • Google Scholar search of Frederic M. Scherer ^ a b c Patents, Citations, and Innovations, by Adam B. Jaffe, Manuel Trajtenberg, pp. 89–153. ^ Cohen, Noam (March 5, 2007). "A Contributor to Wikipedia Has His Fictional Side". The New York Times. Retrieved October 18, 2008.  ^ Wikipedia:Copyrights ^ Walter Vermeir (2007). "Resolution:License update". Wikizine. Retrieved December 4, 2007.  ^ Wikimedia ^ "Licensing update/Questions and Answers". Wikimedia Meta. Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved February 15, 2009.  ^ "Licensing_update/Timeline". Wikimedia Meta. Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved April 5, 2009.  ^ "Wikimedia community approves license migration". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved May 21, 2009.  ^ Cohen, Noam (July 19, 2009). "Wikipedia May Be a Font of Facts, but It's a Desert for Photos". New York Times. Retrieved March 9, 2013.  ^ "Wikipedia cleared in French defamation case". Reuters. November 2, 2007. Retrieved November 2, 2007.  ^ Anderson, Nate (May 2, 2008). "Dumb idea: suing Wikipedia for calling you "dumb"". Ars Technica. Retrieved May 4, 2008.  ^ "With Bing Reference". Archived from the original on March 8, 2013. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia on DVD" Archived June 3, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.. Linterweb. Retrieved June 1, 2007. "Linterweb is authorized to make a commercial use of the Wikipedia trademark restricted to the selling of the Encyclopedia CDs and DVDs". ^ "Wikipedia 0.5 Available on a CD-ROM" Archived May 3, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.. Wikipedia on DVD. Linterweb. "The DVD or CD-ROM version 0.5 was commercially available for purchase." Retrieved June 1, 2007. ^ "Polish Wikipedia on DVD". Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia:DVD". Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "CDPedia (Python Argentina)". Retrieved July 7, 2011.  ^ Wikipedia CD Selection. Retrieved September 8, 2009. ^ "Wikipedia turned into book". The Daily Telegraph. London: Telegraph Media Group. June 16, 2009. Archived from the original on September 9, 2009. Retrieved September 8, 2009.  ^ "Wikipedia Selection for Schools". Retrieved July 14, 2012.  ^ Thiel, Thomas (September 27, 2010). "Wikipedia und Amazon: Der Marketplace soll es richten". Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (in German). Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung. Archived from the original on November 26, 2010. Retrieved December 6, 2010.  ^ Wikipedia policies on data download ^ Data dumps: Downloading Images, Wikimedia Meta-Wiki ^ "Wikipedia Reference Desk". Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Brad Stone, "How Google's Android chief, Sundar Pichai, became the most powerful man in mobile", June 30 – July 6, 2014, Bloomberg BusinessWeek, pp. 47–51. ^ "Wikipedia – Android Apps on Google Play". Play.Google.com. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia Mobile on the App Store on iTunes". iTunes.Apple.com. August 4, 2014. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ "Wikimedia Mobile is Officially Launched". Wikimedia Technical Blog. June 30, 2009. Retrieved July 22, 2009.  ^ "Local Points Of Interest In Wikipedia". May 15, 2011. Retrieved May 15, 2011.  ^ "iPhone Gems: Wikipedia Apps". November 30, 2008. Retrieved July 22, 2008.  ^ Ellis, Justin (January 17, 2013). "Wikipedia plans to expand mobile access around the globe with new funding". NiemanLab. Nieman Journalism Lab. Retrieved April 22, 2013.  ^ Andrew Lih (June 20, 2015). "Can Wikipedia Survive?".  ^ Andrew Brown (June 25, 2015). "Wikipedia editors are a dying breed. The reason? Mobile". The Guardian.  ^ "Wikipedia:Modelling Wikipedia's growth". Retrieved December 22, 2007.  ^ "694 Million People Currently Use the Internet Worldwide According To comScore Networks". comScore. May 4, 2006. Archived from the original on July 30, 2008. Retrieved December 16, 2007. Wikipedia has emerged as a site that continues to increase in popularity, both globally and in the US  ^ "Google Traffic To Wikipedia up 166% Year over Year". Hitwise. February 16, 2007. Retrieved December 22, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedia and Academic Research". Hitwise. October 17, 2006. Retrieved February 6, 2008.  ^ West, Stuart. "Wikipedia's Evolving Impact: slideshow presentation at TED2010" (PDF). Retrieved October 23, 2015.  ^ Rainie, Lee; Bill Tancer (December 15, 2007). "Wikipedia users" (PDF). Pew Internet & American Life Project. Pew Research Center. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 6, 2008. Retrieved December 15, 2007. 36% of online American adults consult Wikipedia. It is particularly popular with the well-educated and current college-age students.  ^ SAI (October 7, 2011). "The World's Most Valuable Startups". Business Insider. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ "Research:Wikipedia Readership Survey 2011/Results – Meta". Wikimedia. February 6, 2012. Retrieved April 16, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia:Wikipedia in the media". Wikipedia. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Bourgeois et al. v. Peters et al." (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on February 3, 2007. Retrieved February 6, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedian Justice" (PDF)|format= requires |url= (help). SSRN 1346311.  Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ "LEGISinfo – House Government Bill C-38 (38–1)". Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Arias, Martha L. (January 29, 2007). "Wikipedia: The Free Online Encyclopedia and its Use as Court Source". Internet Business Law Services. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  (The name "World Intellectual Property Office" should however read "World Intellectual Property Organization" in this source.) ^ Cohen, Noam (January 29, 2007). "Courts Turn to Wikipedia, but Selectively". The New York Times. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Aftergood, Steven (March 21, 2007). "The Wikipedia Factor in US Intelligence". Federation of American Scientists Project on Government Secrecy. Retrieved April 14, 2007.  ^ Butler, Declan (December 16, 2008). "Publish in Wikipedia or perish". Nature News. doi:10.1038/news.2008.1312.  ^ Shaw, Donna (February–March 2008). "Wikipedia in the Newsroom". American Journalism Review. Retrieved February 11, 2008.  ^ Lexington (September 24, 2011). "Classlessness in America: The uses and abuses of an enduring myth". The Economist. Retrieved September 27, 2011. Socialist Labour Party of America […] though it can trace its history as far back as 1876, when it was known as the Workingmen's Party, no less an authority than Wikipedia pronounces it "moribund".  ^ "Shizuoka newspaper plagiarized Wikipedia article". Japan News Review. July 5, 2007.  ^ "Express-News staffer resigns after plagiarism in column is discovered" at the Wayback Machine (archived October 15, 2007), San Antonio Express-News, January 9, 2007. ^ Frank Bridgewater. "Inquiry prompts reporter's dismissal". Honolulu Star-Bulletin. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Grossman, Lev (December 13, 2006). "Time's Person of the Year: You". Time. Time. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Radio 4 documentary, BBC". 2007. Retrieved April 24, 2016.  ^ "Comunicato stampa. On. Franco Grillini. Wikipedia. Interrogazione a Rutelli. Con "diritto di panorama" promuovere arte e architettura contemporanea italiana. Rivedere con urgenza legge copyright" [Press release. Honorable Franco Grillini. Wikipedia. Interview with Rutelli about the "right to view" promoting contemporary art and architecture of Italy. Review with urgency copyright law] (in Italian). October 12, 2007. Archived from the original on March 30, 2009. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Jose Antonio Vargas (September 17, 2007). "On Wikipedia, Debating 2008 Hopefuls' Every Facet". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Jennifer Ablan (October 22, 2007). "Wikipedia page the latest status symbol". Reuters. Retrieved October 24, 2007.  ^ Witzleb, Normann (2009). "Engaging with the World: Students of Comparative Law Write for Wikipedia". 19 (1 and 2). Legal Education Review: 83–98.  ^ "AI Research Trends". One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI100). Stanford University. Retrieved September 3, 2016.  ^ "Trophy box", Meta-Wiki (March 28, 2005). ^ "Webby Awards 2004". The International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences. 2004. Archived from the original on July 22, 2011.  ^ Zumpano, Anthony (January 29, 2007). "Similar Search Results: Google Wins". Interbrand. Archived from the original on February 20, 2007. Retrieved January 28, 2007.  ^ "Die Quadriga – Award 2008". Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Erasmus Prize – Praemium Erasmianum". Praemium Erasmianum Foundation. Retrieved January 15, 2015.  ^ "Premio Princesa de Asturias de Cooperación Internacional 2015". Fundación Princesa de Asturias. Retrieved June 17, 2015.  ^ "Los fundadores de Wikipedia destacan la versión en asturiano" [The founders of Wikipedia highlight the Asturian version] (in Spanish). La Nueva España. Retrieved October 20, 2015.  ^ "Wikipedia Celebrates 750 Years Of American Independence". The Onion. July 26, 2006. Retrieved October 15, 2006.  ^ "'L.A. Law' Wikipedia Page Viewed 874 Times Today". The Onion. November 24, 2010.  ^ "The Office: The Negotiation, 3.19". April 5, 2007. Retrieved December 27, 2014.  ^ "'Office' fans, inspired by Michael Scott, flock to edit Wikipedia". USA Today. April 12, 2007. Retrieved December 12, 2014.  ^ Bakken, Janae. "My Number One Doctor"; Scrubs; ABC; December 6, 2007. ^ "Professor Wikipedia – CollegeHumor Video". CollegeHumor. November 17, 2009. Retrieved April 19, 2011.  ^ "Dilbert comic strip for 05/08/2009 from the official Dilbert comic strips archive". Universal Uclick. May 8, 2009. Retrieved March 10, 2013.  ^ "Interview With Nick Doody and Matt Kirshen". British Comedy Guide. Retrieved July 31, 2009.  ^ "Your Wikipedia Entries". Tosh.0. February 3, 2010. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia Updates". Tosh.0. February 3, 2010. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Emily Flake (August 23, 2013). "Manning/Wikipedia cartoon". Retrieved August 26, 2013.  ^ "The obstacles to reforming our prisons – The Times". thetimes.co.uk. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ "john julius norwich -Search – The Times". thetimes.co.uk. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ "Announcement of Wiktionary's creation". meta.wikimedia.org. Retrieved July 14, 2012.  ^ "Our projects", Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved January 24, 2007. ^ Bosman, Julie. "After 244 Years, Encyclopaedia Britannica Stops the Presses". The New York Times. Retrieved January 26, 2015.  ^ "Encyclopedia Britannica Dies At The Hands Of Wikipedia, Gizmocrazed.com (with statista infographic from NYTimes.com)". Gizmocrazed.com. March 20, 2012. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Christopher Caldwell (June 14, 2013). "A chapter in the Enlightenment closes". ft.com. Retrieved June 15, 2013. Bertelsmann did not resort to euphemism this week when it announced the end of the Brockhaus encyclopedia brand. Brockhaus had been publishing reference books for two centuries when the media group bought it in 2008. […] The internet has finished off Brockhaus altogether. […] What Germans like is Wikipedia.  ^ "The amorality of Web 2.0". Rough Type. October 3, 2005. Retrieved July 15, 2006.  ^ "Technical solutions: Wisdom of the crowds". Nature. Retrieved October 10, 2006.  ^ Alison Flood. "Alison Flood: Should traditional biography be buried alongside Shakespeare's breakfast?". The Guardian. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Rada Mihalcea and Andras Csomai (2007). Wikify! Linking Documents to Encyclopedic Knowledge Archived February 18, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. Proc. CIKM. ^ David Milne and Ian H. Witten (2008). Learning to link with Wikipedia. Proc. CIKM. ^ Sisay Fissaha Adafre and [Maarten de Rijke] (2005). Discovering missing links in Wikipedia Archived July 17, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.. Proc. LinkKDD. ^ "Wikipedia-Mining Algorithm Reveals World's Most Influential Universities: An algorithm's list of the most influential universities contains some surprising entries.". MIT Technology Review. December 7, 2015. Retrieved December 27, 2015.  ^ Marmow Shaw, Jessica (December 10, 2015). "Harvard is only the 3rd most influential university in the world, according to this list". MarketWatch. Retrieved December 27, 2015.  ^ a b Bothwell, Ellie (December 15, 2015). "Wikipedia Ranking of World Universities: the top 100. List ranks institutions by search engine results and Wikipedia appearances". Times Higher Education. Retrieved December 27, 2015.  ^ Heart Internet. "Website discussing the emulator of the Domesday Project User Interface". Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Frauenfelder, Mark (November 21, 2000). "The next generation of online encyclopedias". CNN.com. Archived from the original on August 14, 2004.  ^ The Free Encyclopedia Project gnu.org (Archived January 3, 2012, at WebCite) ^ Orlowski, Andrew (September 18, 2006). "Wikipedia founder forks Wikipedia, More experts, less fiddling?". The Register. Retrieved June 27, 2007. Larry Sanger describes the Citizendium project as a "progressive or gradual fork", with the major difference that experts have the final say over edits.  ^ Lyman, Jay (September 20, 2006). "Wikipedia Co-Founder Planning New Expert-Authored Site". LinuxInsider. Retrieved June 27, 2007.  Notes ^ Many (but not all) of the glyphs featured are equivalent to the English letter W or sounds "wi", "wo" or "wa". See Wikipedia logo. ^ Registration is required for certain tasks such as editing protected pages, creating pages in the English Wikipedia, and uploading files. ^ For a user to be considered active in a given month, one or more actions have had to be made in said month. ^ Wikis are a type of website. The word "wiki" itself is from the Hawaiian word for "quick".[14] ^ As of 19:59, Wednesday, April 26, 2017 (UTC) ^ The procrastination principle dictates that you should wait for problems to arise before solving them. ^ Revisions with libelous content, criminal threats, or copyright infringements may be removed completely. ^ See for example the Biographies of Living Persons Noticeboard or Neutral Point of View Noticeboard, created to address content falling under their respective areas. ^ See "Libel" by David McHam for the legal distinction Further reading Academic studies Main article: Academic studies about Wikipedia Leitch, Thomas. Wikipedia U: Knowledge, authority, and a liberal education in the digital age (2014) Jensen, Richard. "Military History on the Electronic Frontier: Wikipedia Fights the War of 1812", The Journal of Military History 76#4 (October 2012): 523–556; online version. Yasseri, Taha; Robert Sumi; János Kertész (2012). Szolnoki, Attila, ed. "Circadian Patterns of Wikipedia Editorial Activity: A Demographic Analysis". PLoS ONE. 7 (1): e30091. arXiv:1109.1746. Bibcode:2012PLoSO...7E0091Y. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0030091. PMC 3260192. PMID 22272279.  Goldman, Eric (2010). "Wikipedia's Labor Squeeze and its Consequences". Journal of Telecommunications and High Technology Law. 8. SSRN 1458162#.  (A blog post by the author.) Nielsen, Finn (August 2007). "Scientific Citations in Wikipedia". First Monday. 12 (8). doi:10.5210/fm.v12i8.1997. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Pfeil, Ulrike; Panayiotis Zaphiris; Chee Siang Ang (2006). "Cultural Differences in Collaborative Authoring of Wikipedia". Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication. 12 (1): 88. doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2006.00316.x. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  Priedhorsky, Reid, Jilin Chen, Shyong (Tony) K. Lam, Katherine Panciera, Loren Terveen, and John Riedl. "Creating, Destroying, and Restoring Value in Wikipedia". Proc. GROUP 2007; doi:10.1145/1316624.1316663 Reagle, Joseph (2007). Do as I Do: Authorial Leadership in Wikipedia (PDF). WikiSym '07: Proceedings of the 2007 International Symposium on Wikis. Montreal, Canada: ACM. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  Rosenzweig, Roy. Can History be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the Past. (Originally published in The Journal of American History 93.1 (June 2006): 117–46.) Wilkinson, Dennis M.; Bernardo A. Huberman (April 2007). "Assessing the Value of Cooperation in Wikipedia". First Monday. 12 (4). doi:10.5210/fm.v12i4.1763. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Aaron Halfaker; R. Stuart Geiger; Jonathan T. Morgan; John Riedl (2012). "The Rise and Decline of an Open Collaboration Community". American Behavioral Scientist. 57 (5): 664. doi:10.1177/0002764212469365. Retrieved August 30, 2012.  Books Main article: List of books about Wikipedia Ayers, Phoebe; Matthews, Charles; Yates, Ben (September 2008). How Wikipedia Works: And How You Can Be a Part of It. San Francisco: No Starch Press. ISBN 978-1-59327-176-3.  Broughton, John (2008). Wikipedia – The Missing Manual. O'Reilly Media. ISBN 0-596-51516-2.  (See book review by Baker, as listed hereafter.) Broughton, John (2008). Wikipedia Reader's Guide. Sebastopol: Pogue Press. ISBN 0-596-52174-X.  Dalby, Andrew (2009). The World and Wikipedia: How We are Editing Reality. Siduri. ISBN 978-0-9562052-0-9.  Jemielniak, Dariusz (2014). Common Knowledge? An Ethnography of Wikipedia. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press. ISBN 9780804789448.  Keen, Andrew (2007). The Cult of the Amateur. Doubleday/Currency. ISBN 978-0-385-52080-5.  (Substantial criticisms of Wikipedia and other web 2.0 projects.) Listen to: Keen, Andrew (June 16, 2007). "Does the Internet Undermine Culture?". National Public Radio, USA.  The NPR interview with A. Keen, Weekend Edition Saturday, June 16, 2007. Lih, Andrew (2009). The Wikipedia Revolution: How a Bunch of Nobodies Created the World's Greatest Encyclopedia. New York: Hyperion. ISBN 978-1-4013-0371-6.  O'Sullivan, Dan (September 24, 2009). Wikipedia: a new community of practice?. Ashgate Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7546-7433-7.  Sheizaf Rafaeli & Yaron Ariel (2008). "Online motivational factors: Incentives for participation and contribution in Wikipedia." In Barak, A. Psychological aspects of cyberspace: Theory, research, applications. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp. 243–267.  Reagle, Joseph Michael Jr. (2010). Good Faith Collaboration: The Culture of Wikipedia. Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA: the MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-01447-2. Retrieved October 25, 2015.  Wells, Herbert George. (2013). World Brain. New Delhi, India: Isha Books (reprint). ISBN 978-9-333-39061-3. Retrieved June 18, 2016.  Book reviews and other articles Baker, Nicholson. "The Charms of Wikipedia". The New York Review of Books, March 20, 2008. Retrieved December 17, 2008. (Book rev. of The Missing Manual, by John Broughton, as listed previously.) Crovitz, L. Gordon. "Wikipedia's Old-Fashioned Revolution: The online encyclopedia is fast becoming the best." (Originally published in Wall Street Journal online – April 6, 2009.) Postrel, Virginia, "Who Killed Wikipedia? : A hardened corps of volunteer editors is the only force protecting Wikipedia. They might also be killing it", Pacific Standard magazine, November/December 2014 issue. Learning resources Wikiversity list of learning resources. (Includes related courses, Web-based seminars, slides, lecture notes, text books, quizzes, glossaries, etc.) The Great Book of Knowledge, Part 1: A Wiki is a Kind of Bus, Ideas, with Paul Kennedy, CBC Radio One, originally broadcast January 15, 2014. Webpage includes a link to the archived audio program (also found here). The radio documentary discusses Wikipedia's history, development and its place within the broader scope of the trend to democratized knowledge. It also includes interviews with several key Wikipedia staff and contributors, including Kat Walsh and Sue Gardner (audio, 53:58, Flash required). Other media coverage See also: List of films about Wikipedia "See Who's Editing Wikipedia – Diebold, the CIA, a Campaign", WIRED, August 14, 2007. Balke, Jeff (March 2008). "For Music Fans: Wikipedia; MySpace". Houston Chronicle. Broken Record (blog). Retrieved December 17, 2008.  Dee, Jonathan (July 1, 2007). "All the News That's Fit to Print Out". The New York Times Magazine. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Giles, Jim (September 20, 2007). "Wikipedia 2.0 – Now with Added Trust". New Scientist. Retrieved January 14, 2008.  Miliard, Mike (December 2, 2007). "Wikipedia Rules". The Phoenix. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Poe, Marshall (September 1, 2006). "The Hive". The Atlantic Monthly. Retrieved March 22, 2008.  Rosenwald, Michael S. (October 23, 2009). "Gatekeeper of D.C.'s entry: Road to city's Wikipedia page goes through a DuPont Circle bedroom". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 22, 2009.  Runciman, David (May 28, 2009). "Like Boiling a Frog". London Review of Books. Retrieved June 3, 2009.  Taylor, Chris (May 29, 2005). "It's a Wiki, Wiki World". Time. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  "Technological Quarterly: Brain Scan: The Free-knowledge Fundamentalist". The Economist Web and Print. June 5, 2008. Retrieved June 5, 2008. Jimmy Wales changed the world with Wikipedia, the hugely popular online encyclopedia that anyone can edit. What will he do next?  "Is Wikipedia Cracking Up?" The Independent, February 3, 2009. "Wikipedia probe into paid-for 'sockpuppet' entries", BBC News', October 21, 2013. "The Decline of Wikipedia", MIT Technology Review, October 22, 2013 Edits to Wikipedia pages on Bell, Garner, Diallo traced to 1 Police Plaza (March 2015), Capital Angola's Wikipedia Pirates Are Exposing Problems (March 2016), Motherboard Dark Side of Wikipedia at the Wayback Machine (archived August 4, 2016) Full Measure with Sharyl Attkinson, April 17, 2016. (Includes video.) Wales, Jimmy (December 9, 2016). "How Wikipedia Works". cato.org. Cato Institute. Jimmy Wales, founder of Wikipedia, discusses the site, how it’s treated by governments, and how it’s fueled by its users.  External links Find more aboutWikipediaat Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Travel guide from Wikivoyage Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Discussion from Meta-Wiki Documentation from MediaWiki Official website (Mobile) – multilingual portal (contains links to all language editions) (wikipedia.com still redirects here) Wikipedia at DMOZ Wikitrends: Wikipedia articles most visited today "Wikipedia collected news and commentary". The Guardian.  Wikipedia topic page at The New York Times Video of TED talk by Jimmy Wales on the birth of Wikipedia v t e Wikipedia Overview Purpose Censorship Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Deletionism and inclusionism Gender bias Racial bias MediaWiki Notability Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators Arbitration Committee Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wikipedian in residence Wikimania People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Larry Sanger Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikipedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Internet Watch Foundation Scientology Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz Lsjbot VisualEditor Art+Feminism #1Lib1Ref Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Wikipediocracy Wiki-Watch Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related Wikimedia movement Wikimedia Foundation projects The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Category v t e Wikis Types Personal Medical Semantic Wiki farm Components Software Markup Interwiki links Lists Wikis Software Markups and parsers Comparisons Software Wiki farms See also History of wikis Creole v t e Wikimedia Foundation People Current Aaron Halfaker Dariusz Jemielniak Guy Kawasaki Katherine Maher Jimmy Wales Past Hampton Catlin Danese Cooper Bishakha Datta Florence Devouard Oscar van Dillen Sue Gardner Arnnon Geshuri Mike Godwin James Heilman Erik Möller Lila Tretikov Luis Villa Content projects Wikipedia MediaWiki Wiktionary Wikiquote Wikibooks Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikinews Wikiversity Wikidata Wikivoyage Other List of Wikipedias List of Wikimedia chapters Wikimania The Signpost Litigation Wikimedia v. NSA Wikimedia movement Knowledge Engine v t e List of Wikipedias by article count 5,000,000+ English 2,000,000+ Cebuano Swedish German 1,000,000+ Dutch French Russian Italian Spanish Waray Polish Vietnamese Japanese 500,000+ Portuguese Chinese Ukrainian Catalan Persian Arabic 200,000+ Norwegian (bokmål/riksmål) Serbo-Croatian Finnish Hungarian Indonesian Korean Czech Romanian Serbian Turkish Malay Basque Esperanto Bulgarian Danish Minangkabau Armenian Kazakh Slovak Min Nan Hebrew 100,000+ Lithuanian Croatian Chechen Estonian Slovene Belarusian Galician Norwegian (nynorsk) Greek Uzbek Latin Simple English Urdu Volapük Hindi Azerbaijani Thai Georgian 50,000+ Tamil Welsh Macedonian Malagasy Occitan Latvian Bosnian Newar Tatar Tajik Tagalog Telugu Albanian Kirghiz Piedmontese Breton Belarusian (Taraškievica) Cantonese Haitian 20,000+ Javanese Kannada Icelandic Asturian Marathi Malayalam Bengali Afrikaans Irish Scots Chuvash West Frisian Burmese Swahili Aragonese Yoruba Ido Nepal Bhasa Sicilian Bishnupriya Manipuri Punjabi Alemannic 10,000+ Sundanese Mongolian Egyptian Arabic Samogitian Yiddish Odia Ossetian Sanskrit 1,000+ Uyghur Northern Sami Pashto Dutch Low Saxon Sindhi Jamaican Creole Crimean Tatar Silesian Assamese Ripuarian Konkani Tulu Wolof Classical Chinese 100+ Zulu Xhosa Bambara Venda Cree Authority control WorldCat Identities VIAF: 195846295 LCCN: no2008072801 ISNI: 0000 0004 4914 788X GND: 7545251-0 SUDOC: 11109383X BNF: cb150837752 (data) NKC: kn20090528031 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia&oldid=776980171" Categories: Wikipedia 2001 establishments in the United States American websites Collaborative projects Creative Commons-licensed websites Free internet encyclopedias Internet properties established in 2001 Multilingual websites Open content projects Social information processing Virtual communities Wikimedia projects Wikis Hidden categories: CS1 maint: Unfit url Webarchive template wayback links Pages containing links to subscription-only content CS1 German-language sources (de) Pages using citations with format and no URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2016 Articles with permanently dead external links Pages using web citations with no URL Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles with dead external links from July 2015 Articles with dead external links from March 2017 CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template webcite links Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use American English from November 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from April 2017 Pages using deprecated image syntax Articles containing potentially dated statements from April 2017 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles including recorded pronunciations Articles containing potentially dated statements from February 2014 Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2015 Articles containing potentially dated statements from January 2017 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from March 2017 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Wikipedia articles in need of updating from November 2016 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2008 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from October 2015 Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2010 Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2009 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007 Articles with DMOZ links Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Articles containing video clips Pages with graphs Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikibooks Wikinews Wikiquote Wikiversity Languages Acèh ???????? Afrikaans Akan Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ?????? ??????? Aragonés ????? Armãneashti Arpetan ??????? Asturianu Avañe'? ???? Aymar aru Az?rbaycanca ?????? Bamanankan ????? Bahasa Banjar Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ??????? Bikol Central Bislama ????????? Boarisch ??????? Bosanski Brezhoneg ?????? Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? Dolnoserbski Eesti ???????? Emiliàn e rumagnòl ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ?? G?k?y? ????? ??????? ?????? ?????? ?????? / Gõychi Konknni ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa Hawai?i ??????? ?????? Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue ??????/inuktitut Iñupiak ???? IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kalaallisut ????? Kapampangan ????????-??????? ??????? ????? / ????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî ???????? ????? ???? Ladino ????? ????? ??? ???? ?????? Latga?u Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Ligure Limburgs Lingála Livvinkarjala La .lojban. Luganda Lumbaart Magyar ?????? ?????????? Malagasy ?????? Malti M?ori ????? ????????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-d??ng-ng?? Mirandés ??????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????? N?huatl Dorerin Naoero Nederlands Nedersaksies ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norfuk / Pitkern Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? Pälzisch Pangasinan ?????? Papiamentu ???? Patois ????? ???? ????????? Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski ???????? Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Q?r?mtatarca Reo tahiti Ripoarisch Român? Romani Rumantsch Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sámegiella Gagana Samoa ????????? Sängö Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana Shqip Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? SiSwati Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????????? / ?????????? ?l?nski Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Sranantongo ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Taqbaylit Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ?????? Tetun ??? ???? ?????? ??? Tsetsêhestâhese Tshivenda Türkçe Türkmençe Twi ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? ???? ???????? / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Võro Walon ?? West-Vlams Winaray Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zazaki Zeêuws Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 24 April 2017, at 14:46. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_content |||Free content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For the use of free content on Wikipedia, see Wikipedia:Free content. Free Cultural Works logo Free content, libre content, or free information, is any kind of functional work, work of art, or other creative content that meets the definition of a free cultural work. Contents 1 Definition 2 Legal matters 2.1 Copyright 2.2 Public domain 2.3 Copyleft 3 Usage 3.1 Media 3.2 Software 3.3 Engineering and technology 3.4 Academia 3.5 Legislation 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Definition[edit] A free cultural work (free content) is, according to the Definition of free cultural works, one that has no significant legal restriction on people's freedom to: use the content and benefit from using it, study the content and apply what is learned, make and distribute copies of the content, change and improve the content and distribute these derivative works.[1][2] Free content encompasses all works in the public domain and also those copyrighted works whose licenses honor and uphold the freedoms mentioned above. Because the Berne Convention in most countries by default grants copyright holders monopolistic control over their creations, copyright content must be explicitly declared free, usually by the referencing or inclusion of licensing statements from within the work. Although there are a great many different definitions in regular everyday use, free content is legally very similar, if not like an identical twin, to open content. An analogy is the use of the rival terms free software and open source, which describe ideological differences rather than legal ones.[3][4][5] For instance, the Open Knowledge Foundation's Open Definition describes "open" as synonymous to the definition of free in the "Definition of Free Cultural Works" (as also in the Open Source Definition and Free Software Definition).[6] For such free/open content both movements recommend the same three Creative Commons licenses, the CC BY, CC BY-SA, and CC0.[7][8][9][10] Legal matters[edit] Copyright[edit] copyright Main article: Copyright Copyright is a legal concept, which gives the author or creator of a work legal control over the duplication and public performance of his or her work. In many jurisdictions, this is limited by a time period after which the works then enter the public domain. Copyright laws are a balance between the rights of creators of intellectual and artistic works and the rights of others to build upon those works. During the time period of copyright the author's work may only be copied, modified, or publicly performed with the consent of the author, unless the use is a fair use. Traditional copyright control limits the use of the work of the author to those who either pay royalties to the author for usage of the authors content, or limit their use to fair use. Secondly it limits the use of content whose author cannot be found.[11] Finally it creates a perceived barrier between authors by limiting derivative works, such as mashups and collaborative content[12] Public domain[edit] public domain Main article: Public domain The public domain is a range of creative works whose copyright has expired, or was never established; as well as ideas and facts[nb 1] which are ineligible for copyright. A public domain work is a work whose author has either relinquished to the public, or no longer can claim control over, the distribution and usage of the work. As such any person may manipulate, distribute, or otherwise utilize the work, without legal ramifications. A work in the public domain or released under a permissive licence may be referred to as "copycenter".[13] Copyleft[edit] Main article: Copyleft copyleft Copyleft is a play on the word copyright and describes the practice of using copyright law to remove restrictions on distributing copies and modified versions of a work.[14] The aim of copyleft is to use the legal framework of copyright to enable non-author parties to be able to reuse and, in many licensing schemes, modify content that is created by an author. Unlike works in the public domain, the author still maintains copyright over the material, however the author has granted a non-exclusive license to any person to distribute, and often modify, the work. Copyleft licenses require that any derivative works be distributed under the same terms, and that the original copyright notices be maintained. A symbol commonly associated with copyleft is a reversal of the copyright symbol, facing the other way; the opening of the C points left rather than right. Unlike the copyright symbol, the copyleft symbol does not have a codified meaning.[15] Usage[edit] Projects that provide free content exist in several areas of interest, such as software, academic literature, general literature, music, images, video, and engineering. Technology has reduced the cost of publication and reduced the entry barrier sufficiently to allow for the production of widely disseminated materials by individuals or small groups. Projects to provide free literature and multimedia content have become increasingly prominent owing to the ease of dissemination of materials that is associated with the development of computer technology. Such dissemination may have been too costly prior to these technological developments. Media[edit] Creative Commons Main article: Creative Commons In media, which includes textual, audio, and visual content, free licensing schemes such as some of the licenses made by Creative Commons have allowed for the dissemination of works under a clear set of legal permissions. Not all of the Creative Commons’ licenses are entirely free: their permissions may range from very liberal general redistribution and modification of the work to a more restrictive redistribution-only licensing. Since February 2008, Creative Commons licenses which are entirely free carry a badge indicating that they are "approved for free cultural works".[16] Repositories exist which exclusively feature free material provide content such as photographs, clip art, music,[17] and literature,.[18] While extensive reuse of free content from one website in another website is legal, it is usually not sensible because of the duplicate content problem. Wikipedia is amongst the most well known databases of user uploaded free content on the web. While the vast majority of content on Wikipedia is free content, some copyrighted material is hosted under Fair-use criteria. Software[edit] OSI logo FSF logo Main article: Free and open-source software Free and open source software, which is also often referred to as open source software and free software, is a maturing technology with major companies utilising free software to provide both services and technology to both end users and technical consumers. The ease of dissemination has allowed for increased modularity, which allows for smaller groups to contribute to projects as well as simplifying collaboration. Open source development models have been classified as having a similar peer-recognition and collaborative benefit incentives that are typified by more classical fields such as scientific research, with the social structures that result from this incentive model decreasing production cost.[19] Given sufficient interest in a software component, by using peer-to-peer distribution methods, distribution costs of software may be reduced, removing the burden of infrastructure maintenance from developers. As distribution resources are simultaneously provided by consumers, these software distribution models are scalable, that is the method is feasible regardless of the number of consumers. In some cases, free software vendors may use peer-to-peer technology as a method of dissemination.[20] In general, project hosting and code distribution is not a problem for the most of free projects as a number of providers offer them these services for free. Engineering and technology[edit] Open source hardware logo Free content principles have been translated into fields such as engineering, where designs and engineering knowledge can be readily shared and duplicated, in order to reduce overheads associated with project development. Open design principles can be applied in engineering and technological applications, with projects in mobile telephony, small-scale manufacture,[21] the automotive industry,[22][23] and even agricultural areas.[24] Technologies such as distributed manufacturing can allow computer-aided manufacturing and computer-aided design techniques to be able to develop small-scale production of components for the development of new, or repair of existing, devices. Rapid fabrication technologies underpin these developments, which allow end users of technology to be able to construct devices from pre-existing blueprints, using software and manufacturing hardware to convert information into physical objects. Academia[edit] open access Main article: Open access (publishing) In academic work, the majority of works are not free, although the percentage of works that are open access is growing rapidly. Open access refers to online research outputs that are free of all restrictions on access (e.g. access tolls) and free of many restrictions on use (e.g. certain copyright and license restrictions).[25] Authors may see open access publishing as a method of expanding the audience that is able to access their work to allow for greater impact of the publication, or may support it for ideological reasons.[26][27][28] Open access publishers such as PLOS and Biomed Central provide capacity for review and publishing of free works; though such publications are currently more common in science than humanities. Various funding institutions and governing research bodies have mandated that academics must produce their works to be open-access, in order to qualify for funding, such as the National Institutes of Health, RCUK (effective 2016) and the EU (effective 2020).[29][30][31][32] At an institutional level some universities, such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), have adopted open access publishing by default by introducing their own mandates.[33] Some mandates may permit delayed publication and may charge researchers for open access publishing.[34][35] Open content publication has been seen as a method of reducing costs associated with information retrieval in research, as universities typically pay to subscribe for access to content that is published through traditional means[10][36][37] whilst improving journal quality by discouraging the submission of research articles of reduced quality.[10] Subscriptions for non-free content journals may be expensive for universities to purchase, though the article are written and peer-reviewed by academics themselves at no cost to the publisher. This has led to disputes between publishers and some universities over subscription costs, such as the one which occurred between the University of California and the Nature Publishing Group.[38][39] For teaching purposes, some universities, including MIT, provide freely available course content, such as lecture notes, video resources and tutorials. This content is distributed via Internet resources to the general public. Publication of such resources may be either by a formal institution-wide program,[40] or alternately via informal content provided by individual academics or departments. Legislation[edit] Any country has its own law and legal system, sustained by its legislation, a set of law-documents — documents containing statutory obligation rules, usually law and created by legislatures. In a democratic country, each law-document is published as open media content, is in principle a free content; but in general there are no explicit license attributed for each law-document, so the license must be interpreted, is a implied license. Only few countries have explicit licenses in its law-documents, as the UK's Open Government Licence (a CC-BY compatible license). In the other countries, the implied license comes from its proper rules (general laws and rules about copyright in government works). The automatic protection provided by Berne Convention not apply to law-documents: Article 2.4 excludes the official texts from the automatic protection. It is also possible to "inherit" the license from context. The set of country's law-documents is made available through national repositories. Examples of law-document open repositories: LexML Brazil, Legislation.gov.uk, N-Lex of EU countries. In general a law-document is offered in more than one (open) official version, but the main one is that published by a government gazette. So, law-documents can eventually inherit license expressed by the repository or by the gazette that contains it. See also[edit] Content (media) Definition of Free Cultural Works Free and open source software Free culture movement Free software movement Freedom of information Libre knowledge Open Content Alliance Open publishing Open-source hardware Permissive free software licence Project Gutenberg Notes[edit] ^ The copyright status of uncreative aggregates of basic data may differ by region, for the USA see Feist Publications v. Rural Telephone Service, for Australia, see Telstra v Desktop Marketing Systems References[edit] ^ Erik Möller, e.a. (2008). "Definition of Free Cultural Works". 1.1. freedomdefined.org. Retrieved 2015-04-20.  ^ Stallman, Richard (November 13, 2008). "Free Software and Free Manuals". Free Software Foundation. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Stallman, Richard. "Why Open Source misses the point of Free Software". Free Software Foundation.  ^ Kelty, Christpher M. (2008). "The Cultural Significance of free Software - Two Bits" (PDF). Duke University press - durham and london. p. 99. Prior to 1998, Free Software referred either to the Free Software Foundation (and the watchful, micromanaging eye of Stallman) or to one of thousands of different commercial, avocational, or university-research projects, processes, licenses, and ideologies that had a variety of names: sourceware, freeware, shareware, open software, public domain software, and so on. The term Open Source, by contrast, sought to encompass them all in one movement.  ^ "Goodbye, "free software"; hello, "open source"". Catb.org. Retrieved 2012-10-25.  ^ Open Definition 2.1 on opendefinition.org "This essential meaning matches that of "open" with respect to software as in the Open Source Definition and is synonymous with "free" or "libre" as in the Free Software Definition and Definition of Free Cultural Works." ^ licenses on opendefinition.com ^ Creative Commons 4.0 BY and BY-SA licenses approved conformant with the Open Definition by Timothy Vollmer on creativecommons.org (December 27th, 2013) ^ Open Definition 2.0 released by Timothy Vollmer on creativecommons.org (October 7th, 2014) ^ a b c "Costs and business models in scientific research publishing: A report commissioned by the Wellcome Trust" (PDF). Retrieved May 23, 2009.  ^ "The Importance of Orphan Works Legislation".  ^ Ben Depoorter; Francesco Parisi (2002). "Fair use and copyright protection: a price theory explanation". International Review of Law and Economics. 21 (4): 453. doi:10.1016/S0144-8188#01)00071-0.  ^ Raymond, Eric S. "Copycenter". The Jargon File. Retrieved August 9, 2008.  ^ Dusollier, S (2003). "Open source and copyleft. Authorship reconsidered?". Columbia journal of Law and the Arts. 26 (296).  ^ Hall, G. Brent (2008). Open Source Approaches in Spatial Data Handling. Springer. p. 29. ISBN 3-540-74830-X. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Linksvayer, Mike (February 20, 2008). "Approved for Free Cultural Works". Creative Commons. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "iRate Radio". SourceForge.net. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "Gutenberg:No Cost or Freedom?". Project Gutenberg. April 23, 2007. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Mustonen, Mikko. "Copyleft – the economics of Linux and other open source software" (PDF). Discussion Paper No. 493. Department of Economics, University of Helsinki. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Pawlak, Michel; Bryce, Ciarán; Laurière, Stéphane (May 29, 2008). "The Practice of Free and Open Source Software Processes" (PDF). Rapport de recherche. inria-00274193, version 2. Institut national de recherche en informatique et en automatique (INRIA). N° 6519 (April 2008). ISSN 0249-6399. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Hendry, Andrew (March 4, 2008). "RepRap: An open-source 3D printer for the masses". Computerworld Australia. The Industry Standard. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Honsig, Markus (January 25, 2006). "The most open of all cars". Technology Review (in German). Heinz Heise. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "Australian drive for green commuter cars". The Sydney Morning Herald. Sydney. 14 June 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2015.  ^ Stewart, Jr., C. Neal (December 2005). "Open-source Agriculture" (PDF). ISB News Report. Information Systems for Biotechnology (ISB). Retrieved March 22, 2009.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Suber, Peter. "Open Access Overview". Earlham.edu. Retrieved on 2011-12-03. ^ Alma Swan; Sheridan Brown (May 2005). "Open access self-archiving: An author study" (PDF). Key Perspectives Limited.  ^ Andrew, Theo (October 30, 2003). "Trends in Self-Posting of Research Material Online by Academic Staff". Ariadne. UKOLN (37). ISSN 1361-3200. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Key Perspectives. "JISC/OSI Journal Authors Survey Report" (PDF). Joint Information Systems Committee (JISC). Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Haslam, Maryanne. "NHMRC Partnership Projects – Funding Policy" (PDF). National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 17, 2009. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "Policy on Enhancing Public Access to Archived Publications Resulting from NIH-Funded Research". Retrieved July 12, 2009.  ^ "Open access - RCUK Policy and revised guidance".  ^ "Outcome of Proceedings, 9526/16 RECH 208 TELECOM 100, The transition towards an Open Science System".  ^ "MIT faculty open access to their scholarly articles". MIT news. 20 March 2009.  ^ "Policy of the Society for General Microbiology towards author self-archiving on PubMed Central and institutional and other repositories". Retrieved April 10, 2009.  ^ "OnlineOpen". Retrieved April 10, 2009.  ^ Mayor, Susan (April 19, 2003). "Libraries face higher costs for academic journals". BMJ: British Medical Journal. BMJ Group. 326 (7394): 840. PMC 1125769.  |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ "AMS Journal price survey". Retrieved May 23, 2009.  ^ "Response from the University of California to the Public statement from Nature Publishing Group regarding subscription renewals at the California Digital Library" (PDF). June 10, 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 26, 2010. Retrieved September 13, 2015.  ^ Hawkes, Nigel (November 10, 2003). "Boycott 'greedy' journal publishers, say scientists". The Times. London. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Retrieved September 13, 2015.  ^ "About OpenCourseWare". Retrieved April 10, 2009.  Further reading[edit] D. Atkins; J. S. Brown; A. L. Hammond (February 2007). A Review of the Open Educational Resources (OER) Movement: Achievements, Challenges, and New Opportunities. (PDF). Report to The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation.  OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development: Giving Knowledge for free – The Emergence of Open Educational Resources. 2007, ISBN 92-64-03174-X. External links[edit] Definition of Free Cultural Works – A definition of "free content" or "free cultural works" similar to the free software definition "Episodes of collective invention" (PDF) (Peter B. Meyer; August 4, 2003) – article on several U.S.-oriented historical examples of free content in technology Open Definition – project by the Open Knowledge Foundation which provides a definition of "open" suitable for content and data What is free content? on WikiEducator v t e Intellectual property activism Issues Copyright infringement Digital rights management Gripe site Intellectual property Legal aspects of file sharing Mashup digital videos music Music piracy Orphan works Patents biological software software patent debate trolling Public domain Concepts All rights reversed Alternative compensation system Anti-copyright notice Business models for open source software Copyleft Commercial use of copyleft works Commons-based peer production Free content Free software license Infoanarchism Libertarian positions Open content Open design Open Music Model Open patent Open-source hardware Open source software Prize system contests Share-alike Video on demand Movements Access to Knowledge movement Anti-copyright Cultural environmentalism Free culture movement Free software movement Organizations Copyright Alliance Creative Commons Electronic Frontier Foundation Free Software Foundation Open Rights Group Organization for Transformative Works The Pirate Bay Piratbyrån Pirate Party Sci-Hub Students for Free Culture People Alexandra Elbakyan Rickard Falkvinge Lawrence Lessig Richard Stallman Peter Sunde Peter Suber Aaron Swartz Documentaries Steal This Film (2006, 2007) Good Copy Bad Copy (2007) RiP!: A Remix Manifesto (2008) TPB AFK: The Pirate Bay Away From Keyboard (2013) The Internet's Own Boy (2014) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Free_content&oldid=775063470" Categories: Free content Digital art Free software Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Pages using ISBN magic links Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages ??????? ???? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Català ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Gaeilge Galego ??? ??????? Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??? Latviešu Magyar ?????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ??? Napulitano ??????? Polski Português ??????? Scots Shqip Simple English Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ??? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 12 April 2017, at 12:27. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Encyclopedia |||Encyclopedia From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article is about the type of reference work. For other uses, see Encyclopedia (disambiguation). This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in German. (December 2015) Click [show] for important translation instructions.  View a machine-translated version of the German article. Google's machine translation is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. After translating, {{Translated|de|Enzyklopädie}} must be added to the talk page to ensure copyright compliance. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. Brockhaus Enzyklopädie An encyclopedia or encyclopaedia (also spelled encyclopædia, see spelling differences)[1] is a type of reference work or compendium holding a comprehensive summary of information from either all branches of knowledge or a particular branch of knowledge.[2] Encyclopedias are divided into articles or entries, which are usually accessed alphabetically by article name.[3] Encyclopedia entries are longer and more detailed than those in most dictionaries.[3] Generally speaking, unlike dictionary entries which focus on linguistic information about words, encyclopedia articles focus on factual information concerning the subject for which the article is named.[4][5][6][7] Encyclopedias have existed for around 2,000 years; the oldest still in existence, Naturalis Historia, was written starting in ca. AD 77 by Pliny the Elder and was not fully revised at the time of his death in AD 79. The modern encyclopedia evolved out of dictionaries around the 17th century. Historically, some encyclopedias were contained in one volume, whereas others, such as the Encyclopædia Britannica, the Enciclopedia Italiana (62 volumes, 56,000 pages) or the world's largest, Enciclopedia universal ilustrada europeo-americana (118 volumes, 105,000 pages), became huge multi-volume works. Some modern encyclopedias, such as Wikipedia, are often electronic and freely available. Contents 1 Etymology 2 Characteristics 3 History 3.1 Ancient times 3.2 Middle Ages 3.3 Renaissance 3.4 18th–19th centuries 3.5 20th century 3.6 21st century 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Etymology See also: American and British English spelling differences § Simplification of ae and oe Title page of "Lucubrationes..." 1541 edition, the first book to use the word encyclopedia in the title The word encyclopedia comes from the Koine Greek ????????? ???????,[8] transliterated enkyklios paideia, meaning "general education" from enkyklios (?????????), meaning "circular, recurrent, required regularly, general"[9] and paideia (???????), meaning "education, rearing of a child";[10] it was reduced to a single word due to an error[11] by copyists of Latin manuscripts. Together, the phrase literally translates as "complete instruction" or "complete knowledge". Indeed, the purpose of an encyclopedia is to collect knowledge disseminated around the globe; to set forth its general system to the men with whom we live, and transmit it to those who will come after us, so that the work of preceding centuries will not become useless to the centuries to come; and so that our offspring, becoming better instructed, will at the same time become more virtuous and happy, and that we should not die without having rendered a service to the human race in the future years to come. —?Diderot[12] Copyists of Latin manuscripts took this phrase to be a single Greek word, enkyklopaidia, with the same meaning, and this spurious Greek word became the New Latin word "encyclopaedia", which in turn came into English. Though the notion of a compendium of knowledge dates back thousands of years, the term was first used in the title of a book in 1517 by Johannes Aventinus: Encyclopedia orbisque doctrinarum, hoc est omnium artium, scientiarum, ipsius philosophiae index ac divisio, and in 1538 by Joachimus Fortius Ringelbergius, Lucubrationes vel potius absolutissima kyklopaideia (Basel, 1538). Title page of Skalich's Encyclopaedia, seu orbis disciplinarum, tam sacrarum quam prophanarum, epistemon from 1559, first to use the word encyclopaedia as a noun in the title The word encyclopaedia was first used as a noun in the title of his book by the Croatian encyclopedist Pavao Skali? in his Encyclopaedia seu orbis disciplinarum tam sacrarum quam prophanarum epistemon (Encyclopaedia, or Knowledge of the World of Disciplines, Basel, 1559). One of the oldest vernacular uses was by François Rabelais in his Pantagruel in 1532.[13][14] Several encyclopedias have names that include the suffix -p(a)edia, e.g., Banglapedia (on matters relevant for Bengal). In British usage, the spellings encyclopedia and encyclopaedia are both current.[15] In American usage, only the former is commonly used.[16] The spelling encyclopædia—with the æ ligature—was frequently used in the 19th century and is increasingly rare, although it is retained in product titles such as Encyclopædia Britannica and others. The Oxford English Dictionary (1989) records encyclopædia and encyclopaedia as equal alternatives (in that order), and notes the æ would be obsolete except that it is preserved in works that have Latin titles. Webster's Third New International Dictionary (1997–2002) features encyclopedia as the main headword and encyclopaedia as a minor variant. In addition, cyclopedia and cyclopaedia are now rarely used shortened forms of the word originating in the 17th century. Characteristics The modern encyclopedia was developed from the dictionary in the 18th century. Historically, both encyclopedias and dictionaries have been researched and written by well-educated, well-informed content experts, but they are significantly different in structure. A dictionary is a linguistic work which primarily focuses on alphabetical listing of words and their definitions. Synonymous words and those related by the subject matter are to be found scattered around the dictionary, giving no obvious place for in-depth treatment. Thus, a dictionary typically provides limited information, analysis or background for the word defined. While it may offer a definition, it may leave the reader lacking in understanding the meaning, significance or limitations of a term, and how the term relates to a broader field of knowledge. An encyclopedia is, allegedly, not written in order to convince, although one of its goals is indeed to convince its reader about its own veracity. In the terms of Aristotle's Modes of persuasion, a dictionary should persuade the reader through logos (conveying only appropriate emotions); it will be expected to have a lack of pathos (it should not stir up irrelevant emotions), and to have little ethos except that of the dictionary itself. To address those needs, an encyclopedia article is typically not limited to simple definitions, and is not limited to defining an individual word, but provides a more extensive meaning for a subject or discipline. In addition to defining and listing synonymous terms for the topic, the article is able to treat the topic's more extensive meaning in more depth and convey the most relevant accumulated knowledge on that subject. An encyclopedia article also often includes many maps and illustrations, as well as bibliography and statistics. Four major elements define an encyclopedia: its subject matter, its scope, its method of organization, and its method of production: Encyclopedias can be general, containing articles on topics in every field (the English-language Encyclopædia Britannica and German Brockhaus are well-known examples). General encyclopedias often contain guides on how to do a variety of things, as well as embedded dictionaries and gazetteers.[citation needed] There are also encyclopedias that cover a wide variety of topics but from a particular cultural, ethnic, or national perspective, such as the Great Soviet Encyclopedia or Encyclopaedia Judaica. Works of encyclopedic scope aim to convey the important accumulated knowledge for their subject domain, such as an encyclopedia of medicine, philosophy, or law. Works vary in the breadth of material and the depth of discussion, depending on the target audience. (For example, the Medical encyclopedia produced by A.D.A.M., Inc. for the U.S. National Institutes of Health.) Some systematic method of organization is essential to making an encyclopedia usable as a work of reference. There have historically been two main methods of organizing printed encyclopedias: the alphabetical method (consisting of a number of separate articles, organized in alphabetical order), or organization by hierarchical categories. The former method is today the most common by far, especially for general works. The fluidity of electronic media, however, allows new possibilities for multiple methods of organization of the same content. Further, electronic media offer previously unimaginable capabilities for search, indexing and cross reference. The epigraph from Horace on the title page of the 18th century Encyclopédie suggests the importance of the structure of an encyclopedia: "What grace may be added to commonplace matters by the power of order and connection." As modern multimedia and the information age have evolved, they have had an ever-increasing effect on the collection, verification, summation, and presentation of information of all kinds. Projects such as Everything2, Encarta, h2g2, and Wikipedia are examples of new forms of the encyclopedia as information retrieval becomes simpler. The method of production for an encyclopedia historically has been supported in both for-profit and non-profit contexts. The Great Soviet Encyclopedia mentioned above was entirely state sponsored, while the Britannica was supported as a for-profit institution. By comparison, Wikipedia is supported by volunteers contributing in a non-profit environment under the organization of the Wikimedia Foundation. Some works entitled "dictionaries" are actually similar to encyclopedias, especially those concerned with a particular field (such as the Dictionary of the Middle Ages, the Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships, and Black's Law Dictionary). The Macquarie Dictionary, Australia's national dictionary, became an encyclopedic dictionary after its first edition in recognition of the use of proper nouns in common communication, and the words derived from such proper nouns. There are some broad differences between encyclopedias and dictionaries. Most noticeably, encyclopedia articles are longer, fuller and more thorough than entries in most general-purpose dictionaries.[3][17] There are differences in content as well. Generally speaking, dictionaries provide linguistic information about words themselves, while encyclopedias focus more on the thing for which those words stand.[4][5][6][7] Thus, while dictionary entries are inextricably fixed to the word described, encyclopedia articles can be given a different entry name. As such, dictionary entries are not fully translatable into other languages, but encyclopedia articles can be.[4] In practice, however, the distinction is not concrete, as there is no clear-cut difference between factual, "encyclopedic" information and linguistic information such as appears in dictionaries.[6][17][18] Thus encyclopedias may contain material that is also found in dictionaries, and vice versa.[18] In particular, dictionary entries often contain factual information about the thing named by the word.[17][18] History Main article: History of encyclopedias Encyclopedias have progressed from the beginning of history in written form, through medieval and modern times in print, and most recently, displayed on computer and distributed via computer networks. Ancient times Naturalis Historiæ, 1669 edition, title page One of the earliest encyclopedic works to have survived to modern times is the Naturalis Historia of Pliny the Elder, a Roman statesman living in the 1st century AD. He compiled a work of 37 chapters covering natural history, architecture, medicine, geography, geology, and all aspects of the world around him. He stated in the preface that he had compiled 20,000 facts from 2000 works by over 200 authors, and added many others from his own experience. The work was published around AD 77-79, although he probably never finished proofing the work before his death in the eruption of Vesuvius in AD 79.[19] Middle Ages Isidore of Seville, one of the greatest scholars of the early Middle Ages, is widely recognized for writing the first encyclopedia of the Middle Ages, the Etymologiae (The Etymologies) or Origines (around 630), in which he compiled a sizable portion of the learning available at his time, both ancient and contemporary. The work has 448 chapters in 20 volumes, and is valuable because of the quotes and fragments of texts by other authors that would have been lost had he not collected them. The most popular encyclopedia of the Carolingian Age was the De universo or De rerum naturis by Rabanus Maurus, written about 830; it was based on Etymologiae.[citation needed] The encyclopedia of Suda, a massive 10th-century Byzantine encyclopedia, had 30 000 entries, many drawing from ancient sources that have since been lost, and often derived from medieval Christian compilers. The text was arranged alphabetically with some slight deviations from common vowel order and place in the Greek alphabet. The early Muslim compilations of knowledge in the Middle Ages included many comprehensive works. Around year 960, the Brethren of Purity of Basra[20] were engaged in their Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity. Notable works include Abu Bakr al-Razi's encyclopedia of science, the Mutazilite Al-Kindi's prolific output of 270 books, and Ibn Sina's medical encyclopedia, which was a standard reference work for centuries. Also notable are works of universal history (or sociology) from Asharites, al-Tabri, al-Masudi, Tabari's History of the Prophets and Kings, Ibn Rustah, al-Athir, and Ibn Khaldun, whose Muqadimmah contains cautions regarding trust in written records that remain wholly applicable today. The enormous encyclopedic work in China of the Four Great Books of Song, compiled by the 11th century AD during the early Song dynasty (960–1279), was a massive literary undertaking for the time. The last encyclopedia of the four, the Prime Tortoise of the Record Bureau, amounted to 9.4 million Chinese characters in 1000 written volumes. In the late Middle Ages, several authors had the ambition of compiling the sum of human knowledge in a certain field or overall, for example Bartholomew of England, Vincent of Beauvais, Radulfus Ardens, Sydrac, Brunetto Latini, Giovanni da Sangiminiano, Pierre Bersuire. Some were women, like Hildegard of Bingen and Herrad of Landsberg. The most successful of those publications were the Speculum maius (Great Mirror) of Vincent of Beauvais and the De proprietatibus rerum (On the Properties of Things) by Bartholomew of England. The latter was translated (or adapted) into French, Provençal, Italian, English, Flemish, Anglo-Norman, Spanish, and German during the Middle Ages. Both were written in the middle of the 13th century. No medieval encyclopedia bore the title Encyclopaedia – they were often called On nature (De natura, De naturis rerum), Mirror (Speculum maius, Speculum universale), Treasure (Trésor).[21] Renaissance Anatomy in Margarita Philosophica, 1565 These works were all hand copied and thus rarely available, beyond wealthy patrons or monastic men of learning: they were expensive, and usually written for those extending knowledge rather than those using it.[22] During the Renaissance, the creation of printing allowed a wider diffusion of encyclopedias and every scholar could have his or her own copy. The De expetendis et fugiendis rebus by Giorgio Valla was posthumously printed in 1501 by Aldo Manuzio in Venice. This work followed the traditional scheme of liberal arts. However, Valla added the translation of ancient Greek works on mathematics (firstly by Archimedes), newly discovered and translated. The Margarita Philosophica by Gregor Reisch, printed in 1503, was a complete encyclopedia explaining the seven liberal arts. The term encyclopaedia was coined by 16th century humanists who misread copies of their texts of Pliny and Quintilian, and combined the two Greek words "enkyklios paideia" into one word, ??????????????.[23] The phrase enkyklios paideia (????????? ???????) was used by Plutarch and the Latin word Encyclopedia came from him. The first work titled in this way was the Encyclopedia orbisque doctrinarum, hoc est omnium artium, scientiarum, ipsius philosophiae index ac divisio written by Johannes Aventinus in 1517.[citation needed] The English physician and philosopher, Sir Thomas Browne used the word 'encyclopaedia' in 1646 in the preface to the reader to define his Pseudodoxia Epidemica, a major work of the 17th-century scientific revolution. Browne structured his encyclopaedia upon the time-honoured schemata of the Renaissance, the so-called 'scale of creation' which ascends through the mineral, vegetable, animal, human, planetary, and cosmological worlds. Pseudodoxia Epidemica was a European best-seller, translated into French, Dutch, and German as well as Latin it went through no fewer than five editions, each revised and augmented, the last edition appearing in 1672. Factors that changed the size of encyclopedias were financial, commercial, legal, and intellectual. During the Renaissance, middle classes were having more time to read and encyclopedias helped them to learn more. Publishers were wanting to increase their output so some countries like Germany start selling books that were missing alphabetical sections to publish faster. Also, publishers could not afford all the resources by themselves so they multiple publishers would come together with their resources to create better encyclopedias. Soon it was difficult financially to continue to produce the amount they wanted to produce so then subscriptions and serial publications were made. This was risky for publishers because they had to find people that would pay all upfront or make payments. When this did work out capital would rise and there would be a steady income for encyclopedias. Later rivalry grew causing copyright to occur due to weak underdeveloped laws. Some publishers would copy another publisher’s work to produce an encyclopedia faster and cheaper so consumers did not have to pay a lot and they would sell more. Encyclopedias made it to where middle class citizens could basically have a small library in their own house. Europeans were becoming more curious about their society around them causing them to revolt against their government.[24] 18th–19th centuries Encyclopédie, 1773 The beginnings of the modern idea of the general-purpose, widely distributed printed encyclopedia precede the 18th century encyclopedists. However, Chambers' Cyclopaedia, or Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences (1728), and the Encyclopédie of Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert (1751 onwards), as well as Encyclopædia Britannica and the Conversations-Lexikon, were the first to realize the form we would recognize today, with a comprehensive scope of topics, discussed in depth and organized in an accessible, systematic method. Chambers, in 1728, followed the earlier lead of John Harris's Lexicon Technicum of 1704 and later editions (see also below); this work was by its title and content "A Universal English Dictionary of Arts and Sciences: Explaining not only the Terms of Art, but the Arts Themselves". During the 19th and early 20th century, many smaller or less developed languages[which?] saw their first encyclopedias, using French, German, and English role models. While encyclopedias in larger languages, having large markets that could support a large editorial staff, churned out new 20-volume works in a few years and new editions with brief intervals, such publication plans often spanned a decade or more in smaller languages.[citation needed] 20th century 1913 advertisement for Encyclopædia Britannica, the oldest and one of the largest contemporary English encyclopedias Popular and affordable encyclopedias such as Harmsworth's Universal Encyclopaedia and the Children's Encyclopaedia appeared in the early 1920s. In the United States, the 1950s and 1960s saw the introduction of several large popular encyclopedias, often sold on installment plans. The best known of these were World Book and Funk and Wagnalls. The second half of the 20th century also saw the proliferation of specialized encyclopedias that compiled topics in specific fields. This trend has continued. Encyclopedias of at least one volume in size now exist for most if not all academic disciplines, including such narrow topics such as bioethics. By the late 20th century, encyclopedias were being published on CD-ROMs for use with personal computers. Microsoft's Encarta, launched in 1993, was a landmark example as it had no printed equivalent. Articles were supplemented with both video and audio files as well as numerous high-quality images. After sixteen years, Microsoft discontinued the Encarta line of products in 2009.[25] 21st century In 2001, Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger launched Wikipedia, a collaboratively edited, multilingual, open-source, free Internet encyclopedia supported by the non-profit Wikimedia Foundation. As of 23 April 2017, there are 5,391,001 articles in the English Wikipedia. There are 287 different editions of Wikipedia. As of February 2014, it had 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors each month.[26] Wikipedia has more than 25 million accounts, out of which there were over 118,000 active editors globally, as of August 2015. Wikipedia's accuracy was found by a Nature study to be close to that of Encyclopædia Britannica,[27] with Wikipedia being much larger. However, critics argue Wikipedia exhibits systemic bias,[28][29] and its group dynamics hinder its goals.[clarification needed] Many academics, historians, teachers, and journalists reject Wikipedia as a reliable source of information, primarily for being a mixture of truths, half truths, and some falsehoods, and that as a resource about many controversial topics, is notoriously subject to manipulation and spin.[citation needed] While Wikipedia is by far the largest web-based encyclopedia, it is not the only one in existence. There are several much smaller, usually more specialized, encyclopedias on various themes, sometimes dedicated to a specific geographic region or time period.[30] See also Bibliography of encyclopedias Biographical dictionary Encyclopedic knowledge Encyclopedism Fictitious entry History of science and technology Lexicography Library science Lists of encyclopedias Thesaurus Speculum literature Portals Access related topics Literature portal Library and information science portal Education portal Notes ^ "encyclopaedia" (online). Oxford English Dictionary (OED.com), Oxford University Press. Retrieved February 18, 2012.  ^ "Encyclopedia.". Archived from the original on August 3, 2007.  Glossary of Library Terms. Riverside City College, Digital Library/Learning Resource Center. Retrieved on: November 17, 2007. ^ a b c Hartmann, R. R. K.; James, Gregory; James, Gregory (1998). Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge. p. 48. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010.  ^ a b c Béjoint, Henri (2000). Modern Lexicography, pp. 30–31. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-829951-6 ^ a b "Encyclopaedia". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved July 27, 2010. An English lexicographer, H.W. Fowler, wrote in the preface to the first edition (1911) of The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Current English language that a dictionary is concerned with the uses of words and phrases and with giving information about the things for which they stand only so far as current use of the words depends upon knowledge of those things. The emphasis in an encyclopedia is much more on the nature of the things for which the words and phrases stand.  ^ a b c Hartmann, R. R. K.; Gregory, James (1998). Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge. p. 49. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010. In contrast with linguistic information, encyclopedia material is more concerned with the description of objective realities than the words or phrases that refer to them. In practice, however, there is no hard and fast boundary between factual and lexical knowledge.  ^ a b Cowie, Anthony Paul (2009). The Oxford History of English Lexicography, Volume I. Oxford University Press. p. 22. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved August 17, 2010. An 'encyclopedia' (encyclopaedia) usually gives more information than a dictionary; it explains not only the words but also the things and concepts referred to by the words.  ^ ????????? ???????, Quintilian, Institutio Oratoria, 1.10.1, at Perseus Project ^ ?????????, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon, at Perseus Project ^ ???????, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon, at Perseus Project ^ According to some accounts, such as the American Heritage Dictionary, copyists of Latin manuscripts took this phrase to be a single Greek word, ?????????????? enkyklopaidia. ^ Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert Encyclopédie. University of Michigan Library:Scholarly Publishing Office and DLXS. Retrieved on: November 17, 2007 ^ Roest, Bert (1997). "Compilation as Theme and Praxis in Franciscan Universal Chronicles". In Peter Binkley. Pre-Modern Encyclopaedic Texts: Proceedings of the Second Comers Congress, Groningen, 1 – July 4, 1996. BRILL. p. 213. ISBN 90-04-10830-0.  ^ Carey, Sorcha (2003). "Two Strategies of Encyclopaedism". Pliny's Catalogue of Culture: Art and Empire in the Natural History. Oxford University Press. p. 17. ISBN 0-19-925913-5.  ^ "encyclopaedia", Chambers Reference Online; "encyclopaedia"[dead link], AskOxford. ^ "encyclopaedia" Archived February 17, 2009, at the Wayback Machine., Bartleby.com; "Encyclopaedia", Merriam Webster."Archived copy". Archived from the original on February 17, 2009. Retrieved 2006-12-12.  CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) ^ a b c Hartmann, R. R. K.; James, Gregory; James, Gregory (1998). "Encyclopedic definition". Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge: 48–49. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010. Usually these two aspects overlap – encyclopedic information being difficult to distinguish from linguistic information – and dictionaries attempt to capture both in the explanation of a meaning...  ^ a b c Béjoint, Henri (2000). Modern Lexicography. Oxford University Press. p. 31. ISBN 0-19-829951-6. The two types, as we have seen, are not easily differentiated; encyclopedias contain information that is also to be found in dictionaries, and vice versa.  ^ Naturalis Historia ^ P.D. Wightman (1953), The Growth of Scientific Ideas ^ Monique Paulmier-Foucart, "Medieval Encyclopaedias", in André Vauchez (ed.), Encyclopedia of the Middle Ages, James Clarke & Co, 2002. ^ See "Encyclopedia" in Dictionary of the Middle Ages. ^ ??????????????, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon, at Perseus Project: "f. l. [= falsa lectio, Latin for "false reading"] for ????????? ???????" ^ Loveland, J. (2012). "Why Encyclopedias Got Bigger … and Smaller". Information & Culture. 47 (2): 233–254. doi:10.1353/lac.2012.0012.  ^ Important Notice: MSN Encarta to be Discontinued. MSN Encarta. Archived from the original on October 31, 2009.  ^ Cohen, Noam (February 9, 2014). "Wikipedia vs. the Small Screen". New York Times.  ^ Giles, Jim (December 2005). "Internet encyclopedias go head to head". Nature. 438 (7070): 900–901. Bibcode:2005Natur.438..900G. doi:10.1038/438900a. PMID 16355180. (subscription required) Note: The study was cited in several news articles; e.g.: "Wikipedia survives research test". BBC News. December 15, 2005.  ^ "Gender Bias in Wikipedia and Britannica". Retrieved June 2, 2015.  ^ "Analyzing and visualizing the semantic coverage of Wikipedia and its authors". Complexity. 12: 30–40. doi:10.1002/cplx.20164. Retrieved June 2, 2015.  ^ Sideris A., "The Encyclopedic Concept in the Web Era", in Ioannides M., Arnold D., Niccolucci F. and K. Mania (eds.), The e-volution of Information Communication Technology in Cultural Heritage. Where Hi-Tech Touches the Past: Risks and Challenges for the 21st Century. VAST 2006, Epoch, Budapest 2006, pp. 192-197. ISBN 963-8046-74-0. References EtymologyOnline "Encyclopaedia". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved July 27, 2010.  Béjoint, Henri (2000). Modern Lexicography. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-829951-6.  C. Codoner, S. Louis, M. Paulmier-Foucart, D. Hüe, M. Salvat, A. Llinares, L'Encyclopédisme. Actes du Colloque de Caen, A. Becq (dir.), Paris, 1991. Bergenholtz, H.; Nielsen, S.; Tarp, S., eds. (2009). Lexicography at a Crossroads: Dictionaries and Encyclopedias Today, Lexicographical Tools Tomorrow. Peter Lang. ISBN 978-3-03911-799-4.  Blom, Phillip (2004). Enlightening the World: Encyclopédie, the Book that Changed the Course of History. New York; Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-4039-6895-1. OCLC 57669780.  Collison, Robert Lewis (1966). Encyclopaedias: Their History Throughout the Ages (2nd ed.). New York, London: Hafner. OCLC 220101699.  Cowie, Anthony Paul (2009). The Oxford History of English Lexicography, Volume I. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved August 17, 2010.  Darnton, Robert (1979). The business of enlightenment : a publishing history of the Encyclopédie, 1775–1800. Cambridge: Belknap Press. ISBN 0-674-08785-2.  Hartmann, R. R. K.; James, Gregory; James, Gregory (1998). Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010.  Kafker, Frank A., ed. (1981). Notable encyclopedias of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries: nine predecessors of the Encyclopédie. Oxford: Voltaire Foundation. ISBN 978-0-7294-0256-9. OCLC 10645788.  Kafker, Frank A., ed. (1994). Notable encyclopedias of the late eighteenth century: eleven successors of the Encyclopédie. Oxford: Voltaire Foundation. ISBN 978-0-7294-0467-9. OCLC 30787125.  Needham, Joseph (1986). "Part 7, Military Technology; the Gunpowder Epic". Science and Civilization in China. 5 – Chemistry and Chemical Technology. Taipei: Caves Books Ltd. ISBN 978-0-521-30358-3. OCLC 59245877.  Rosenzweig, Roy (June 2006). "Can History Be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the Past". Journal of American History. 93 (1): 117–46. doi:10.2307/4486062. ISSN 1945-2314. Archived from the original on April 25, 2010.  Sideris, Athanasios (2006). "The Encyclopedic Concept in the Web Era", in Ioannides M., Arnold D., Niccolucci F. and K. Mania (eds.), The e-volution of Information Communication Technology in Cultural Heritage. Where Hi-Tech Touches the Past: Risks and Challenges for the 21st Century. VAST 2006, Epoch, Budapest, pp. 192–197. ISBN 963-8046-74-0. Walsh, S. Padraig (1968). Anglo-American general encyclopedias: a historical bibliography, 1703–1967. New York: Bowker. p. 270. OCLC 577541.  Yeo, Richard R. (2001). Encyclopaedic visions : scientific dictionaries and enlightenment culture. Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-65191-2. OCLC 45828872.  External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Encyclopedias. Look up encyclopedia, encyclopaedia, or encyclopedic in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikisource has original works on the topic: Encyclopedias Encyclopaedia and Hypertext Internet Accuracy Project – Biographical errors in encyclopedias and almanacs Encyclopedia – Diderot's article on the Encyclopedia from the original Encyclopédie. De expetendis et fugiendis rebus – First Renaissance encyclopedia Errors and inconsistencies in several printed reference books and encyclopedias Archived July 18, 2001, at the Wayback Machine. Digital encyclopedias put the world at your fingertips – CNET article Encyclopedias online University of Wisconsin – Stout listing by category Chambers' Cyclopaedia, 1728, with the 1753 supplement Encyclopædia Americana, 1851, Francis Lieber ed. (Boston: Mussey & Co.) at the University of Michigan Making of America site Encyclopædia Britannica, articles and illustrations from 9th ed., 1875–89, and 10th ed., 1902–03. Texts on Wikisource: "Cyclopædia". Collier's New Encyclopedia. 1921.  "Encyclopædia". Encyclopedia Americana. 1920.  "Encyclopædia". The New Student's Reference Work. 1914.  "Encyclopaedia". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.  "Encyclopædia". The Nuttall Encyclopædia. 1907.  "Encyclopædia". New International Encyclopedia. 1905.  "Cyclopædia". The American Cyclopædia. 1879.  Authority control GND: 4014986-9 NDL: 00563841 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Encyclopedia&oldid=774134996" Categories: Encyclopedias Works about history Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2016 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown Pages containing links to subscription-only content Pages using ISBN magic links Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use mdy dates from February 2016 Articles to be expanded from December 2015 All articles to be expanded Featured articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Articles containing Ancient Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Collier's Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW with an wstitle parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Nuttall Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans Akan Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti Asturianu ???? Az?rbaycanca Bamanankan ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski Eesti ???????? Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ??? Hawai?i ??????? ?????? Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ????? / ????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Ladino ????? ??? Latga?u Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Limburgs Lumbaart Magyar ?????????? Malagasy ?????? Malti ????? ????????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-d??ng-ng?? Mirandés ?????? ?????????? N?huatl Nederlands Nedersaksies ?????? ??? Napulitano ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan ???? ????? ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ?????? Papiamentu ???? ????????? Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski ???????? Português Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? ????????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????????? / ?????????? ?l?nski ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ?????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? ???????? / Uyghurche Vèneto Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Walon ?? Winaray Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?????? ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 6 April 2017, at 14:10. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Introduction |||Wikipedia:Introduction From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Help:Contents Introduction   Learn more about editing   Explore Wikipedia   Tutorial What is Wikipedia? Play media A short video about the satisfaction editors get from contributing Wikipedia is a free encyclopedia, written collaboratively by the people who use it. It is a special type of website designed to make collaboration easy, called a wiki. Many people are constantly improving Wikipedia, making thousands of changes per hour. All of these changes are recorded in article histories and recent changes. For a more detailed account of the project, see About Wikipedia. How you can contribute Click "Edit" to change an article Play media Editing tutorial for Wikipedia Don't be afraid to edit – anyone can edit almost every page, and we are encouraged to be bold! Find something that can be improved and make it better—for example, spelling, grammar, rewriting for readability, adding content, or removing non-constructive edits. If you wish to add new facts, please try to provide references so they may be verified, or suggest them on the article's discussion page. Changes to controversial topics and Wikipedia's main pages should usually be discussed first. Contributing to Wikipedia will provide you with resources on all the basics needed to use, comment on, and contribute to Wikipedia. Remember – you can't break Wikipedia; all edits can be reversed, fixed or improved later. Wikipedia is allowed to be imperfect. So go ahead, edit an article and help make Wikipedia the best information source on the Internet! Donate – Wikipedia is free to use, but relies on donations and grants to do so. Please consider donating using the Donate to Wikipedia link on the left to help with the project's running costs and expansion. Why not try out the editor right now? Click here to edit the sandbox, a place to make test edits. (If there is already some text there, add to the end of the text.) Type some text. Click Show preview to test your changes, or Save page when you're happy with the way it looks. Next: Learn more about editing ? Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Introduction&oldid=680454568" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia quick introductions Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Afrikaans Alemannisch Ænglisc ??????? ??????? ???? ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski ?????? Català Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ??????? ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano ????? Kapampangan ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî Ladino ??? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Limburgs Magyar ?????????? ?????? ???? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ??? Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ???? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Romani Runa Simi ??????? Sámegiella ????????? Sardu Scots Sicilianu Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ??? Türkçe ?????? ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 10 September 2015, at 23:28. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:Statistics |||Statistics Jump to: navigation, search Page statistics Content pages 5,393,680 Pages (All pages in the wiki, including talk pages, redirects, etc.) 41,989,774 Uploaded files 844,765 Edit statistics Page edits since Wikipedia was set up 886,655,705 Average edits per page 21.12 User statistics Registered users 30,796,035 Active registered users (list of members) (Users who have performed an action in the last 30 days) 135,691 Bots (list of members) 314 Administrators (list of members) 1,263 Bureaucrats (list of members) 22 Pending changes reviewers (list of members) 6,772 Stewards (list of members) 0 Account creators (list of members) 342 Importers (list of members) 2 Transwiki importers (list of members) 0 IP block exemptions (list of members) 164 Oversighters (list of members) 50 Founder (list of members) 1 Rollbackers (list of members) 5,723 Autopatrolled (list of members) 3,647 Researchers (list of members) 10 File movers (list of members) 397 Checkusers (list of members) 39 Template editors (list of members) 154 Mass message senders (list of members) 47 Extended confirmed users (list of members) 33,796 Page movers (list of members) 132 New page reviewers (list of members) 392 Edit filter managers (list of members) 169 Confirmed users (list of members) 481 Course coordinators (list of members) 24 Course online volunteers (list of members) 91 Course campus volunteers (list of members) 104 Course instructors (list of members) 215 Other statistics Queued mass messages 0 Other statistics Internal statistics See here for the job queue statistic ("jobs") Special:ValidationStatistics: Pending changes statistics See also Wikipedia:Statistics and Category:Wikipedia statistics for a fuller list of pages that provide, analyze or discuss Wikipedia statistics. External statistics Most viewed pages Site traffic statistics Article traffic statistics Wikipedia Statistics - Tables - English Alexa traffic analysis for Wikipedia Wikipedia.org is more popular than... Other Wikipedias Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:Statistics" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Special page Variants Views More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools Upload file Special pages Printable version Languages Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/English_language |||English language From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For other uses, see English (disambiguation). English Pronunciation /????l??/[1] Region Originally England now worldwide (see Geographical distribution, below) Native speakers 360–400 million (2006)[2] L2 speakers: 400 million; as a foreign language: 600–700 million[2] Language family Indo-European Germanic West Germanic Ingvaeonic Anglo-Frisian Anglic English Early forms Old English Middle English Early Modern English Writing system Latin script (English alphabet) English Braille, Unified English Braille Signed forms Manually coded English (multiple systems) Official status Official language in 67 countries 27 non-sovereign entities Various organisations United Nations European Union Commonwealth of Nations Council of Europe ICC IOC ISO NATO WTO NAFTA OAS OECD OIC OPEC GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development* PIF UKUSA Agreement ASEAN ASEAN Economic Community SAARC Turkic Council ECO Language codes ISO 639-1 en ISO 639-2 eng ISO 639-3 eng Glottolog stan1293[3] Linguasphere 52-ABA   Countries of the world where English is a majority native language   Countries where English is official but not a majority native language This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. English i/????l??/ is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and is now the global lingua franca.[4][5] Named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to England, it ultimately derives its name from the Anglia (Angeln) peninsula in the Baltic Sea. It is most closely related to the Frisian languages, but its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages in the early medieval period, and later by Romance languages, particularly Latin and French.[6] English is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. It is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland, and New Zealand, and is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa, and South Asia.[7] It is the third most common native language in the world, after Mandarin and Spanish.[8] It is the most widely learned second language and an official language of the United Nations, of the European Union, and of many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a set of Anglo-Frisian dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the fifth century, are called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England, and was a period in which the language was influenced by French.[9] Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London and the King James Bible, and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.[10] Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, modern English spread around the world from the 17th to mid-20th centuries. Through all types of printed and electronic media, as well as the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and in professional contexts such as science, navigation, and law.[11] Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax.[12] Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. Despite noticeable variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions – in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar and spelling – English-speakers from around the world are able to communicate with one another with relative ease. Contents 1 Classification 2 History 2.1 Proto-Germanic to Old English 2.2 Middle English 2.3 Early Modern English 2.4 Spread of Modern English 3 Geographical distribution 3.1 Three circles of English-speaking countries 3.2 Pluricentric English 3.3 English as a global language 4 Phonology 4.1 Consonants 4.2 Vowels 4.3 Phonotactics 4.4 Stress, rhythm and intonation 4.5 Regional variation 5 Grammar 5.1 Nouns and noun phrases 5.1.1 Adjectives 5.1.2 Pronouns, case and person 5.1.3 Prepositions 5.2 Verbs and verb phrases 5.2.1 Tense, aspect and mood 5.2.2 Phrasal verbs 5.2.3 Adverbs 5.3 Syntax 5.3.1 Basic constituent order 5.3.2 Clause syntax 5.3.3 Auxiliary verb constructions 5.3.4 Questions 5.3.5 Discourse level syntax 6 Vocabulary 6.1 Word formation processes 6.2 Word origins 6.3 English loanwords and calques in other languages 7 Writing system 8 Dialects, accents, and varieties 8.1 UK and Ireland 8.2 North America 8.3 Australia and New Zealand 8.4 Africa, the Caribbean, and South Asia 9 References 10 Bibliography 11 External links Classification The Germanic languages in Europe The Anglo-Frisian languages   English   Scots   West Frisian   North Frisian   Saterland Frisian Phylogenetic tree showing the historical relations between the languages of the West Germanic branch of the Germanic languages English is an Indo-European language, and belongs to the West Germanic group of the Germanic languages.[13] Most closely related to English are the three Frisian languages: West Frisian, North Frisian and Saterland Frisian, with which English forms the Anglo-Frisian subgroup within West Germanic. Low German (Low Saxon) (nr. 19-24 on the map), which evolved from Old Saxon, is also closely related, and sometimes Low German, English, and Frisian are grouped together as the Ingvaeonic (North Sea Germanic) languages.[14] Furthermore, English is closely related to German, Dutch and Afrikaans. While Dutch and Afrikaans are classified as Franconian languages (nr. 25, 29 and 32), Standard German is based on Thuringian-Upper Saxon dialects (nr. 30), and therefore is more closely related to the North Sea Germanic languages. Since the Central German dialects (nr. 29-31) Standard German is based on, were, other than English, Dutch and Afrikaans (and also Low German), affected by the High German consonant shift, German seems more distantly related to English than Dutch and Afrikaans, since cognates often are not so easily recognizable, but still, English and German resemble each other to a high degree: English: The white wise flying ghost was friendly and his best friend was the green frog who sat under the elm and sang. German: Der weiße weise fliegende Geist war freundlich und sein bester Freund war der grüne Frosch der unter der Ulme saß und sang. Modern English descends from Middle English, which in turn descends from Old English.[15] Particular dialects of Old and Middle English also developed into a number of other English (Anglic) languages, including Scots[16] and the extinct Fingallian and Forth and Bargy (Yola) dialects of Ireland.[17] English is classified as a Germanic language because it shares new language features (different from other Indo-European languages) with other Germanic languages such as Dutch, German, and Swedish.[18] These shared innovations show that the languages have descended from a single common ancestor, which linguists call Proto-Germanic. Some shared features of Germanic languages are the use of modal verbs, the division of verbs into strong and weak classes, and the sound changes affecting Proto-Indo-European consonants, known as Grimm's and Verner's laws. Through Grimm's law, the word for foot begins with /f/ in Germanic languages, but its cognates in other Indo-European languages begin with /p/. English is classified as an Anglo-Frisian language because Frisian and English share other features, such as the palatalisation of consonants that were velar consonants in Proto-Germanic (see Phonological history of Old English § Palatalization).[19] English sing, sang, sung; Dutch zingen, zong, gezongen; German singen, sang, gesungen (strong verb) English laugh, laughed; Dutch and German lachen, lachte (weak verb) English foot, Dutch voet, German Fuß, Norwegian and Swedish fot (initial /f/ derived from Proto-Indo-European *p through Grimm's law) Latin pes, stem ped-; Modern Greek ???? pódi; Russian ??? pod; Sanskrit ??? pád (original Proto-Indo-European *p) English cheese, Frisian tsiis (ch and ts from palatalisation) German Käse and Dutch kaas (k without palatalisation) English, like the other insular Germanic languages, Icelandic and Faroese, developed independently of the continental Germanic languages and their influences. English is thus not mutually intelligible with any continental Germanic language, differing in vocabulary, syntax, and phonology, although some, such as Dutch, do show strong affinities with English, especially with its earlier stages.[20] Because English through its history has changed considerably in response to contact with other languages, particularly Old Norse and Norman French, some scholars have argued that English can be considered a mixed language or a creole – a theory called the Middle English creole hypothesis. Although the high degree of influence from these languages on the vocabulary and grammar of Modern English is widely acknowledged, most specialists in language contact do not consider English to be a true mixed language.[21][22] History Main article: History of the English language Proto-Germanic to Old English Main article: Old English The opening to the Old English epic poem Beowulf, handwritten in half-uncial script: H?æt ?? G?rde/na ing?ar dagum þ?od cyninga / þrym ge frunon... "Listen! We of the Spear-Danes from days of yore have heard of the glory of the folk-kings..." The earliest form of English is called Old English or Anglo-Saxon (c. 550–1066 CE). Old English developed from a set of North Sea Germanic dialects originally spoken along the coasts of Frisia, Lower Saxony, Jutland, and Southern Sweden by Germanic tribes known as the Angles, Saxons, and Jutes. In the fifth century, the Anglo-Saxons settled Britain and the Romans withdrew from Britain. By the seventh century, the Germanic language of the Anglo-Saxons became dominant in Britain, replacing the languages of Roman Britain (43–409 CE): Common Brittonic, a Celtic language, and Latin, brought to Britain by the Roman occupation.[23][24][25] England and English (originally Ænglaland and Ænglisc) are named after the Angles.[26] Old English was divided into four dialects: the Anglian dialects, Mercian and Northumbrian, and the Saxon dialects, Kentish and West Saxon.[27] Through the educational reforms of King Alfred in the ninth century and the influence of the kingdom of Wessex, the West Saxon dialect became the standard written variety.[28] The epic poem Beowulf is written in West Saxon, and the earliest English poem, Cædmon's Hymn, is written in Northumbrian.[29] Modern English developed mainly from Mercian, but the Scots language developed from Northumbrian. A few short inscriptions from the early period of Old English were written using a runic script.[30] By the sixth century, a Latin alphabet was adopted, written with half-uncial letterforms. It included the runic letters wynn ??? and thorn ?þ?, and the modified Latin letters eth ?ð?, and ash ?æ?.[30][31] Old English is very different from Modern English and difficult for 21st-century English speakers to understand. Its grammar was similar to that of modern German, and its closest relative is Old Frisian. Nouns, adjectives, pronouns, and verbs had many more inflectional endings and forms, and word order was much freer than in Modern English. Modern English has case forms in pronouns (he, him, his) and a few verb endings (I have, he has), but Old English had case endings in nouns as well, and verbs had more person and number endings.[32][33][34] The translation of Matthew 8:20 from 1000 CE shows examples of case endings (nominative plural, accusative plural, genitive singular) and a verb ending (present plural): Foxas habbað holu and heofonan fuglas nest Fox-as habb-að hol-u and heofon-an fugl-as nest-? fox-NOM.PL have-PRS.PL hole-ACC.PL and heaven-GEN.SG bird-NOM.PL nest-ACC.PL "Foxes have holes and the birds of heaven nests"[35] Middle English Main article: Middle English Englischmen þeyz hy hadde fram þe bygynnyng þre manner speche, Souþeron, Northeron, and Myddel speche in þe myddel of þe lond, … Noþeles by comyxstion and mellyng, furst wiþ Danes, and afterward wiþ Normans, in menye þe contray longage ys asperyed, and som vseþ strange wlaffyng, chyteryng, harryng, and garryng grisbytting. Although, from the beginning, Englishmen had three manners of speaking, southern, northern and midlands speech in the middle of the country, … Nevertheless, through intermingling and mixing, first with Danes and then with Normans, amongst many the country language has arisen, and some use strange stammering, chattering, snarling, and grating gnashing. “ ” John of Trevisa, ca. 1385[36] In the period from the 8th to the 12th century, Old English gradually transformed through language contact into Middle English. Middle English is often arbitrarily defined as beginning with the conquest of England by William the Conqueror in 1066, but it developed further in the period from 1200–1450. First, the waves of Norse colonisation of northern parts of the British Isles in the 8th and 9th centuries put Old English into intense contact with Old Norse, a North Germanic language. Norse influence was strongest in the Northeastern varieties of Old English spoken in the Danelaw area around York, which was the centre of Norse colonisation; today these features are still particularly present in Scots and Northern English. However the centre of norsified English seems to have been in the Midlands around Lindsey, and after 920 CE when Lindsey was reincorporated into the Anglo-Saxon polity, Norse features spread from there into English varieties that had not been in intense contact with Norse speakers. Some elements of Norse influence that persist in all English varieties today are the pronouns beginning with th- (they, them, their) which replaced the Anglo-Saxon pronouns with h- (hie, him, hera).[37] With the Norman conquest of England in 1066, the now norsified Old English language was subject to contact with the Old Norman language, a Romance language closely related to Modern French. The Norman language in England eventually developed into Anglo-Norman. Because Norman was spoken primarily by the elites and nobles, while the lower classes continued speaking Anglo-Saxon, the influence of Norman consisted of introducing a wide range of loanwords related to politics, legislation and prestigious social domains.[38] Middle English also greatly simplified the inflectional system, probably in order to reconcile Old Norse and Old English, which were inflectionally different but morphologically similar. The distinction between nominative and accusative case was lost except in personal pronouns, the instrumental case was dropped, and the use of the genitive case was limited to describing possession. The inflectional system regularised many irregular inflectional forms,[39] and gradually simplified the system of agreement, making word order less flexible.[40] By the Wycliffe Bible of the 1380s, the passage Matthew 8:20 was written Foxis han dennes, and briddis of heuene han nestis[41] Here the plural suffix -n on the verb have is still retained, but none of the case endings on the nouns are present. By the 12th century Middle English was fully developed, integrating both Norse and Norman features; it continued to be spoken until the transition to early Modern English around 1500. Middle English literature includes Geoffrey Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales, and Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur. In the Middle English period the use of regional dialects in writing proliferated, and dialect traits were even used for effect by authors such as Chaucer. Early Modern English Main article: Early Modern English Graphic representation of the Great Vowel Shift, showing how the pronunciation of the long vowels gradually shifted, with the high vowels i: and u: breaking into diphthongs and the lower vowels each shifting their pronunciation up one level The next period in the history of English was Early Modern English (1500–1700). Early Modern English was characterised by the Great Vowel Shift (1350–1700), inflectional simplification, and linguistic standardisation. The Great Vowel Shift affected the stressed long vowels of Middle English. It was a chain shift, meaning that each shift triggered a subsequent shift in the vowel system. Mid and open vowels were raised, and close vowels were broken into diphthongs. For example, the word bite was originally pronounced as the word beet is today, and the second vowel in the word about was pronounced as the word boot is today. The Great Vowel Shift explains many irregularities in spelling, since English retains many spellings from Middle English, and it also explains why English vowel letters have very different pronunciations from the same letters in other languages.[42][43] English began to rise in prestige during the reign of Henry V. Around 1430, the Court of Chancery in Westminster began using English in its official documents, and a new standard form of Middle English, known as Chancery Standard, developed from the dialects of London and the East Midlands. In 1476, William Caxton introduced the printing press to England and began publishing the first printed books in London, expanding the influence of this form of English.[44] Literature from the Early Modern period includes the works of William Shakespeare and the translation of the Bible commissioned by King James I. Even after the vowel shift the language still sounded different from Modern English: for example, the consonant clusters /kn ?n sw/ in knight, gnat, and sword were still pronounced. Many of the grammatical features that a modern reader of Shakespeare might find quaint or archaic represent the distinct characteristics of Early Modern English.[45] In the 1611 King James Version of the Bible, written in Early Modern English, Matthew 8:20 says: The Foxes haue holes and the birds of the ayre haue nests[35] This exemplifies the loss of case and its effects on sentence structure (replacement with Subject-Verb-Object word order, and the use of of instead of the non-possessive genitive), and the introduction of loanwords from French (ayre) and word replacements (bird originally meaning "nestling" had replaced OE fugol). Spread of Modern English By the late 18th century, the British Empire had facilitated the spread of English through its colonies and geopolitical dominance. Commerce, science and technology, diplomacy, art, and formal education all contributed to English becoming the first truly global language. English also facilitated worldwide international communication.[46][47] As England continued to form new colonies, these in turn became independent and developed their own norms for how to speak and write the language. English was adopted in North America, India, parts of Africa, Australasia, and many other regions. In the post-colonial period, some of the newly created nations that had multiple indigenous languages opted to continue using English as the official language to avoid the political difficulties inherent in promoting any one indigenous language above the others.[48][49][50] In the 20th century the growing economic and cultural influence of the United States and its status as a superpower following the Second World War has, along with worldwide broadcasting in English by the BBC[51] and other broadcasters, significantly accelerated the spread of the language across the planet.[52][53] By the 21st century, English was more widely spoken and written than any language has ever been.[54] A major feature in the early development of Modern English was the codification of explicit norms for standard usage, and their dissemination through official media such as public education and state sponsored publications. In 1755 Samuel Johnson published his A Dictionary of the English Language which introduced a standard set of spelling conventions and usage norms. In 1828, Noah Webster published the American Dictionary of the English language in an effort to establish a norm for speaking and writing American English that was independent from the British standard. Within Britain, non-standard or lower class dialect features were increasingly stigmatised, leading to the quick spread of the prestige varieties among the middle classes.[55] In terms of grammatical evolution, Modern English has now reached a stage where the loss of case is almost complete (case is now only found in pronouns, such as he and him, she and her, who and whom), and where SVO word-order is mostly fixed.[55] Some changes, such as the use of do-support have become universalised. (Earlier English did not use the word "do" as a general auxiliary as Modern English does; at first it was only used in question constructions where it was not obligatory.[56] Now, do-support with the verb have is becoming increasingly standardised.) The use of progressive forms in -ing, appears to be spreading to new constructions, and forms such as had been being built are becoming more common. Regularisation of irregular forms also slowly continues (e.g. dreamed instead of dreamt), and analytical alternatives to inflectional forms are becoming more common (e.g. more polite instead of politer). British English is also undergoing change under the influence of American English, fuelled by the strong presence of American English in the media and the prestige associated with the US as a world power. [57][58][59] Geographical distribution See also: List of territorial entities where English is an official language, List of countries by English-speaking population, and English-speaking world Percentage of English speakers by country.   80-100%   60-80%   40-60%   20-40%    0-20%   Not available As of 2016, 400 million people spoke English as their first language, and 1.1 billion spoke it as a secondary language.[60] English is probably the third largest language by number of native speakers, after Mandarin and Spanish.[8] However, when combining native and non-native speakers it may, depending on the estimate used, be the most commonly spoken language in the world.[54][61][62][63] English is spoken by communities on every continent and on oceanic islands in all the major oceans.[64] The countries in which English is spoken can be grouped into different categories by how English is used in each country. The "inner circle"[65] countries with many native speakers of English share an international standard of written English and jointly influence speech norms of English around the world. English does not belong to just one country, and it does not belong solely to descendants of English settlers. English is an official language of countries populated by few descendants of native speakers of English. It has also become by far the most important language of international communication when people who share no native language meet anywhere in the world. Three circles of English-speaking countries Braj Kachru distinguishes countries where English is spoken with a three circles model.[65] In his model, the "inner circle" countries are countries with large communities of native speakers of English, "outer circle" countries have small communities of native speakers of English but widespread use of English as a second language in education or broadcasting or for local official purposes, and "expanding circle" countries are countries where many learners learn English as a foreign language. Kachru bases his model on the history of how English spread in different countries, how users acquire English, and the range of uses English has in each country. The three circles change membership over time.[66] Braj Kachru's Three Circles of English. Countries with large communities of native speakers of English (the inner circle) include Britain, the United States, Australia, Canada, Ireland, and New Zealand, where the majority speaks English, and South Africa, where a significant minority speaks English. The countries with the most native English speakers are, in descending order, the United States (at least 231 million),[67] the United Kingdom (60 million),[68][69][70] Canada (19 million),[71] Australia (at least 17 million),[72] South Africa (4.8 million),[73] Ireland (4.2 million), and New Zealand (3.7 million).[74] In these countries, children of native speakers learn English from their parents, and local people who speak other languages or new immigrants learn English to communicate in their neighbourhoods and workplaces.[75] The inner-circle countries provide the base from which English spreads to other countries in the world.[66] Estimates of the number of English speakers who are second language and foreign-language speakers vary greatly from 470 million to more than 1,000 million depending on how proficiency is defined.[7] Linguist David Crystal estimates that non-native speakers now outnumber native speakers by a ratio of 3 to 1.[61] In Kachru's three-circles model, the "outer circle" countries are countries such as the Philippines,[76] Jamaica,[77] India, Pakistan[citation needed], Singapore,[78] and Nigeria[79][80] with a much smaller proportion of native speakers of English but much use of English as a second language for education, government, or domestic business, and where English is routinely used for school instruction and official interactions with the government.[81] Those countries have millions of native speakers of dialect continua ranging from an English-based creole to a more standard version of English. They have many more speakers of English who acquire English in the process of growing up through day by day use and listening to broadcasting, especially if they attend schools where English is the medium of instruction. Varieties of English learned by speakers who are not native speakers born to English-speaking parents may be influenced, especially in their grammar, by the other languages spoken by those learners.[75] Most of those varieties of English include words little used by native speakers of English in the inner-circle countries,[75] and they may have grammatical and phonological differences from inner-circle varieties as well. The standard English of the inner-circle countries is often taken as a norm for use of English in the outer-circle countries.[75] In the three-circles model, countries such as Poland, China, Brazil, Germany, Japan, Indonesia, Egypt, and other countries where English is taught as a foreign language make up the "expanding circle".[82] The distinctions between English as a first language, as a second language, and as a foreign language are often debatable and may change in particular countries over time.[81] For example, in the Netherlands and some other countries of Europe, knowledge of English as a second language is nearly universal, with over 80 percent of the population able to use it,[83] and thus English is routinely used to communicate with foreigners and often in higher education. In these countries, although English is not used for government business, the widespread use of English in these countries puts them at the boundary between the "outer circle" and "expanding circle". English is unusual among world languages in how many of its users are not native speakers but speakers of English as a second or foreign language.[84] Many users of English in the expanding circle use it to communicate with other people from the expanding circle, so that interaction with native speakers of English plays no part in their decision to use English.[85] Non-native varieties of English are widely used for international communication, and speakers of one such variety often encounter features of other varieties.[86] Very often today a conversation in English anywhere in the world may include no native speakers of English at all, even while including speakers from several different countries.[87] Pie chart showing the percentage of native English speakers living in "inner circle" English-speaking countries. Native speakers are now substantially outnumbered worldwide by second-language speakers of English (not counted in this chart).   US (64.3%)   UK (16.7%)   Canada (5.3%)   Australia (4.7%)   South Africa (1.3%)   Ireland (1.1%)   New Zealand (1%)   Other (5.6%) Pluricentric English English is a pluricentric language, which means that no one national authority sets the standard for use of the language.[88][89][90][91] But English is not a divided language,[92] despite a long-standing joke originally attributed to George Bernard Shaw that the United Kingdom and the United States are "two countries separated by a common language".[93] Spoken English, for example English used in broadcasting, generally follows national pronunciation standards that are also established by custom rather than by regulation. International broadcasters are usually identifiable as coming from one country rather than another through their accents,[94] but newsreader scripts are also composed largely in international standard written English. The norms of standard written English are maintained purely by the consensus of educated English-speakers around the world, without any oversight by any government or international organisation.[95] American listeners generally readily understand most British broadcasting, and British listeners readily understand most American broadcasting. Most English speakers around the world can understand radio programmes, television programmes, and films from many parts of the English-speaking world.[96] Both standard and nonstandard varieties of English can include both formal or informal styles, distinguished by word choice and syntax and use both technical and non-technical registers.[97] The settlement history of the English-speaking inner circle countries outside Britain helped level dialect distinctions and produce koineised forms of English in South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand.[98] The majority of immigrants to the United States without British ancestry rapidly adopted English after arrival. Now the majority of the United States population are monolingual English speakers,[99][67] although English has been given official status by only 30 of the 50 state governments of the US.[100][101] English as a global language English has ceased to be an "English language" in the sense of belonging only to people who are ethnically English.[102][103] Use of English is growing country-by-country internally and for international communication. Most people learn English for practical rather than ideological reasons.[104] Many speakers of English in Africa have become part of an "Afro-Saxon" language community that unites Africans from different countries.[105] As decolonisation proceeded throughout the British Empire in the 1950s and 1960s, former colonies often did not reject English but rather continued to use it as independent countries setting their own language policies.[49][50][106] For example, the view of the English language among many Indians has gone from associating it with colonialism to associating it with economic progress, and English continues to be an official language of India.[107] English is also widely used in media and literature, and the number of English language books published annually in India is the third largest in the world after the US and UK.[108] However English is rarely spoken as a first language, numbering only around a couple hundred-thousand people, and less than 5% of the population speak fluent English in India.[109][110] David Crystal claimed in 2004 that, combining native and non-native speakers, India now has more people who speak or understand English than any other country in the world,[111] but the number of English speakers in India is very uncertain, with most scholars concluding that the United States still has more speakers of English than India.[112] Modern English, sometimes described as the first global lingua franca,[52][113] is also regarded as the first world language.[114][115] English is the world's most widely used language in newspaper publishing, book publishing, international telecommunications, scientific publishing, international trade, mass entertainment, and diplomacy.[115] English is, by international treaty, the basis for the required controlled natural languages[116] Seaspeak and Airspeak, used as international languages of seafaring[117] and aviation.[118] English used to have parity with French & German in scientific research, but now it dominates that field.[119] It achieved parity with French as a language of diplomacy at the Treaty of Versailles negotiations in 1919.[120] By the time of the foundation of the United Nations at the end of World War II, English had become pre-eminent [121] and is now the main worldwide language of diplomacy and international relations.[122] It is one of six official languages of the United Nations.[123] Many other worldwide international organisations, including the International Olympic Committee, specify English as a working language or official language of the organisation. Many regional international organisations such as the European Free Trade Association, Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),[53] and Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) set English as their organisation's sole working language even though most members are not countries with a majority of native English speakers. While the European Union (EU) allows member states to designate any of the national languages as an official language of the Union, in practice English is the main working language of EU organisations.[124] Although in most countries English is not an official language, it is currently the language most often taught as a foreign language.[52][53] In the countries of the EU, English is the most widely spoken foreign language in nineteen of the twenty-five member states where it is not an official language (that is, the countries other than the UK, Ireland and Malta). In a 2012 official Eurobarometer poll, 38 percent of the EU respondents outside the countries where English is an official language said they could speak English well enough to have a conversation in that language. The next most commonly mentioned foreign language, French (which is the most widely known foreign language in the UK and Ireland), could be used in conversation by 12 percent of respondents.[125] A working knowledge of English has become a requirement in a number of occupations and professions such as medicine[126] and computing. English has become so important in scientific publishing that more than 80 percent of all scientific journal articles indexed by Chemical Abstracts in 1998 were written in English, as were 90 percent of all articles in natural science publications by 1996 and 82 percent of articles in humanities publications by 1995.[127] Specialised subsets of English arise spontaneously in international communities, for example, among international business people, as an auxiliary language. This has led some scholars to develop the study of English as an auxiliary languages. Globish uses a relatively small subset of English vocabulary (about 1500 words with highest use in international business English) in combination with the standard English grammar. Other examples include Simple English. The increased use of the English language globally has had an effect on other languages, leading to some English words being assimilated into the vocabularies of other languages. This influence of English has led to concerns about language death,[128] and to claims of linguistic imperialism,[129] and has provoked resistance to the spread of English; however the number of speakers continues to increase because many people around the world think that English provides them with opportunities for better employment and improved lives.[130] Although some scholars mention a possibility of future divergence of English dialects into mutually unintelligible languages, most think a more likely outcome is that English will continue to function as a koineised language in which the standard form unifies speakers from around the world.[131] English is used as the language for wider communication in countries around the world.[132] Thus English has grown in worldwide use much more than any constructed language proposed as an international auxiliary language, including Esperanto.[133][134] Phonology Main article: English phonology The phonetics and phonology of English differ between dialects, usually without interfering with mutual communication. Phonological variation affects the inventory of phonemes (speech sounds that distinguish meaning), and phonetic variation is differences in pronunciation of the phonemes.[135] This overview mainly describes the standard pronunciations of the United Kingdom and the United States: Received Pronunciation (RP) and General American (GA) (See Section below on "Dialects, accents and varieties"). The phonetic symbols used below are from the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA).[136][137][138] Consonants Main article: English phonology § Consonants Most English dialects share the same 24 consonant phonemes. The consonant inventory shown below is valid for Californian American English,[139] and for RP.[140] Consonant phonemes Labial Dental Alveolar Post- alveolar Palatal Velar Glottal Nasal m n ? Stop p b t d k ? Affricate t? d? Fricative f v ? ð s z ? ? h Approximant ?* j w Lateral l * Conventionally transcribed /r/. In the table, when obstruents (stops, affricates, and fricatives) appear in pairs, such as /p b/, /t? d?/, and /s z/, the first is fortis (strong) and the second is lenis (weak). Fortis obstruents, such as /p t? s/ are pronounced with more muscular tension and breath force than lenis consonants, such as /b d? z/, and are always voiceless. Lenis consonants are partly voiced at the beginning and end of utterances, and fully voiced between vowels. Fortis stops such as /p/ have additional articulatory or acoustic features in most dialects: they are aspirated [p?] when they occur alone at the beginning of a stressed syllable, often unaspirated in other cases, and often unreleased [p? ] or pre-glottalised [?p] at the end of a syllable. In a single-syllable word, a vowel before a fortis stop is shortened: thus nip has a noticeably shorter vowel (phonetically, but not phonemically) than nib [n??p?] (see below).[141] lenis stops: bin [b???n], about [??ba?t], nib [n??b?] fortis stops: pin [?p??n], spin [sp?n], happy [?hæpi], nip [?nip? ] or [?ni?p] In RP, the lateral approximant /l/, has two main allophones (pronunciation variants): the clear or plain [l], as in light, and the dark or velarised [?], as in full.[142] GA has dark l in most cases.[143] clear l: RP light [la?t] dark l: RP and GA full [f??], GA light [?a?t] All sonorants (liquids /l, r/ and nasals /m, n, ?/) devoice when following a voiceless obstruent, and they are syllabic when following a consonant at the end of a word.[144] voiceless sonorants: clay [?kl????] and snow [?sn?o?] syllabic sonorants: paddle [pad.l?], and button [b?t.n?] Vowels Main article: English phonology § Vowels The pronunciation of vowels varies a great deal between dialects and is one of the most detectable aspects of a speaker's accent. The table below lists the vowel phonemes in Received Pronunciation (RP) and General American (GA), with examples of words in which they occur from lexical sets compiled by linguists. The vowels are represented with symbols from the International Phonetic Alphabet; those given for RP are standard in British dictionaries and other publications. monophthongs RP GA word i? i need ? bid e ? bed æ back monophthongs RP GA word (?) ? roses ? comma ?? ?r bird ? but monophthongs RP GA word u? u food ? good ?? ? paw ? cloth ? box ?? bra diphthongs RP GA word e? bay ?? o? road a? cry a? cow ?? boy In RP, vowel length is phonemic; long vowels are marked with a triangular colon ??? in the table above, such as the vowel of need [ni?d] as opposed to bid [b?d]. GA does not have long vowels. In both RP and GA, vowels are phonetically shortened before fortis consonants in the same syllable, like /t t? f/, but not before lenis consonants like /d d? v/ or in open syllables: thus, the vowels of rich [r??t?], neat [ni?t], and safe [s???f] are noticeably shorter than the vowels of ridge [r?d?], need [ni?d], and save [se?v], and the vowel of light [l???t] is shorter than that of lie [la?]. Because lenis consonants are frequently voiceless at the end of a syllable, vowel length is an important cue as to whether the following consonant is lenis or fortis.[145] The vowels /? ?/ only occur in unstressed syllables and are a result of vowel reduction. Some dialects do not distinguish them, so that roses and comma end in the same vowel, a dialect feature called weak-vowel merger. GA has an unstressed r-coloured schwa /?/, as in butter [?b?t?], which in RP has the same vowel as the word-final vowel in comma. Phonotactics An English syllable includes a syllable nucleus consisting of a vowel sound. Syllable onset and coda (start and end) are optional. A syllable can start with up to three consonant sounds, as in sprint /spr?nt/, and end with up to four, as in texts /teksts/. This gives an English syllable the following structure, (CCC)V(CCCC) where C represents a consonant and V a vowel. The consonants that may appear together in onsets or codas are restricted, as is the order in which they may appear. Onsets can only have four types of consonant clusters: a stop and approximant, as in play; a voiceless fricative and approximant, as in fly or sly; s and a voiceless stop, as in stay; and s, a voiceless stop, and an approximant, as in string.[146] Clusters of nasal and stop are only allowed in codas. Clusters of obstruents always agree in voicing, and clusters of sibilants and of plosives with the same point of articulation are prohibited. Furthermore, several consonants have limited distributions: /h/ can only occur in syllable initial position, and /?/ only in syllable final position.[147] Stress, rhythm and intonation See also: Stress and vowel reduction in English and Intonation in English Stress plays an important role in English. Certain syllables are stressed, while others are unstressed. Stress is a combination of duration, intensity, vowel quality, and sometimes changes in pitch. Stressed syllables are pronounced longer and louder than unstressed syllables, and vowels in unstressed syllables are frequently reduced while vowels in stressed syllables are not.[148] Some words, primarily short function words but also some modal verbs such as can, have weak and strong forms depending on whether they occur in stressed or non-stressed position within a sentence. Stress in English is phonemic, and some pairs of words are distinguished by stress. For instance, the word contract is stressed on the first syllable (/?k?ntrækt/ KON-trakt) when used as a noun, but on the last syllable (/k?n?trækt/ k?n-TRAKT) for most meanings (for example, "reduce in size") when used as a verb.[149][150][151] Here stress is connected to vowel reduction: in the noun "contract" the first syllable is stressed and has the unreduced vowel /?/, but in the verb "contract" the first syllable is unstressed and its vowel is reduced to /?/. Stress is also used to distinguish between words and phrases, so that a compound word receives a single stress unit, but the corresponding phrase has two: e.g. to búrn óut versus a búrnout, and a hótdog versus a hót dóg.[152] In terms of rhythm, English is generally described as a stress-timed language, meaning that the amount of time between stressed syllables tends to be equal. Stressed syllables are pronounced longer, but unstressed syllables (syllables between stresses) are shortened. Vowels in unstressed syllables are shortened as well, and vowel shortening causes changes in vowel quality: vowel reduction. Regional variation Varieties of Standard English and their features[153] Phonological features United States Canada Republic of Ireland Northern Ireland Scotland England Wales South Africa Australia New Zealand father–bother merger yes yes /?/ is unrounded yes yes yes /??r/ is pronounced [?] yes yes yes yes cot–caught merger possibly yes possibly yes yes fool–full merger yes yes /t?d/ flapping (latter-ladder merger) yes yes possibly often rarely rarely rarely rarely yes often trap–bath split possibly possibly yes yes yes often yes non-rhotic (/r/-dropping after vowels) yes yes yes yes yes close vowels for /æ, ?/ yes yes yes /l/ can always be pronounced [?] yes yes yes yes yes yes /??r/ is fronted possibly yes yes Dialects and low vowels word RP GA Can sound change THOUGHT /?/ /?/ or /?/ /?/ cot–caught merger CLOTH /?/ lot–cloth split LOT /?/ father–bother merger PALM /??/ PLANT /æ/ /æ/ trap–bath split BATH TRAP /æ/ Varieties of English vary the most in pronunciation of vowels. The best known national varieties used as standards for education in non English-speaking countries are British (BrE) and American (AmE). Countries such as Canada, Australia, Ireland, New Zealand and South Africa have their own standard varieties which are less often used as standards for education internationally. Some differences between the various dialects are shown in the table "Varieties of Standard English and their features".[153] English has undergone many historical sound changes, some of them affecting all varieties, and others affecting only a few. Most standard varieties are affected by the Great Vowel Shift, which changed the pronunciation of long vowels, but a few dialects have slightly different results. In North America, a number of chain shifts such as the Northern Cities Vowel Shift and Canadian Shift have produced very different vowel landscapes in some regional accents. Some dialects have fewer or more consonant phonemes and phones than the standard varieties. Some conservative varieties like Scottish English have a voiceless [?] sound in whine that contrasts with the voiced [w] in wine, but most other dialects pronounce both words with voiced [w], a dialect feature called wine–whine merger. The unvoiced velar fricative sound /x/ is found in Scottish English, which distinguishes loch /l?x/ from lock /l?k/. Accents like Cockney with "h-dropping" lack the glottal fricative /h/, and dialects with th-stopping and th-fronting like African American Vernacular and Estuary English do not have the dental fricatives /?, ð/, but replace them with dental or alveolar stops /t, d/ or labiodental fricatives /f, v/.[154][155] Other changes affecting the phonology of local varieties are processes such as yod-dropping, yod-coalescence, and reduction of consonant clusters. General American and Received Pronunciation vary in their pronunciation of historical /r/ after a vowel at the end of a syllable (in the syllable coda). GA is a rhotic dialect, meaning that it pronounces /r/ at the end of a syllable, but RP is non-rhotic, meaning that it loses /r/ in that position. English dialects are classified as rhotic or non-rhotic depending on whether they elide /r/ like RP or keep it like GA.[156] There is complex dialectal variation in words with the open front and open back vowels /æ ?? ? ??/. These four vowels are only distinguished in RP, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. In GA, these vowels merge to three /æ ? ?/,[157] and in Canadian English they merge to two /æ ?/.[158] In addition, the words that have each vowel vary by dialect. The table "Dialects and open vowels" shows this variation with lexical sets in which these sounds occur. Grammar Main article: English grammar As is typical of an Indo-European language, English follows accusative morphosyntactic alignment. English distinguishes at least seven major word classes: verbs, nouns, adjectives, adverbs, determiners (i.e. articles), prepositions, and conjunctions. Some analyses add pronouns as a class separate from nouns, and subdivide conjunctions into subordinators and coordinators, and add the class of interjections.[159] English also has a rich set of auxiliary verbs, such as have and do, expressing the categories of mood and aspect. Questions are marked by do-support, wh-movement (fronting of question words beginning with wh-) and word order inversion with some verbs. Some traits typical of Germanic languages persist in English, such as the distinction between irregularly inflected strong stems inflected through ablaut (i.e. changing the vowel of the stem, as in the pairs speak/spoke and foot/feet) and weak stems inflected through affixation (such as love/loved, hand/hands). Vestiges of the case and gender system are found in the pronoun system (he/him, who/whom) and in the inflection of the copula verb to be. The seven word classes are exemplified in this sample sentence:[160] The chairman of the committee and the loquacious politician clashed violently when the meeting started Det. Noun Prep. Det. Noun Conj. Det. Adj. Noun Verb Advb. Conj. Det. Noun Verb Nouns and noun phrases English nouns are only inflected for number and possession. New nouns can be formed through derivation or compounding. They are semantically divided into proper nouns (names) and common nouns. Common nouns are in turn divided into concrete and abstract nouns, and grammatically into count nouns and mass nouns.[161] Most count nouns are inflected for plural number through the use of the plural suffix -s, but a few nouns have irregular plural forms. Mass nouns can only be pluralised through the use of a count noun classifier, e.g. one loaf of bread, two loaves of bread.[162] Regular plural formation: Singular: cat, dog Plural: cats, dogs Irregular plural formation: Singular: man, woman, foot, fish, ox, knife, mouse Plural: men, women, feet, fish, oxen, knives, mice Possession can be expressed either by the possessive enclitic -s (also traditionally called a genitive suffix), or by the preposition of. Historically the -s possessive has been used for animate nouns, whereas the of possessive has been reserved for inanimate nouns. Today this distinction is less clear, and many speakers use -s also with inanimates. Orthographically the possessive -s is separated from the noun root with an apostrophe. Possessive constructions: With -s: The woman's husband's child With of: The child of the husband of the woman Nouns can form noun phrases (NPs) where they are the syntactic head of the words that depend on them such as determiners, quantifiers, conjunctions or adjectives.[163] Noun phrases can be short, such as the man, composed only of a determiner and a noun. They can also include modifiers such as adjectives (e.g. red, tall, all) and specifiers such as determiners (e.g. the, that). But they can also tie together several nouns into a single long NP, using conjunctions such as and, or prepositions such as with, e.g. the tall man with the long red trousers and his skinny wife with the spectacles (this NP uses conjunctions, prepositions, specifiers and modifiers). Regardless of length, an NP functions as a syntactic unit. For example, the possessive enclitic can, in cases which do not lead to ambiguity, follow the entire noun phrase, as in The President of India's wife, where the enclitic follows India and not President. The class of determiners is used to specify the noun they precede in terms of definiteness, where the marks a definite noun and a or an an indefinite one. A definite noun is assumed by the speaker to be already known by the interlocutor, whereas an indefinite noun is not specified as being previously known. Quantifiers, which include one, many, some and all, are used to specify the noun in terms of quantity or number. The noun must agree with the number of the determiner, e.g. one man (sg.) but all men (pl.). Determiners are the first constituents in a noun phrase.[164] Adjectives Adjectives modify a noun by providing additional information about their referents. In English, adjectives come before the nouns they modify and after determiners.[165] In Modern English, adjectives are not inflected, and they do not agree in form with the noun they modify, as adjectives in most other Indo-European languages do. For example, in the phrases the slender boy, and many slender girls, the adjective slender does not change form to agree with either the number or gender of the noun. Some adjectives are inflected for degree of comparison, with the positive degree unmarked, the suffix -er marking the comparative, and -est marking the superlative: a small boy, the boy is smaller than the girl, that boy is the smallest. Some adjectives have irregular comparative and superlative forms, such as good, better, and best. Other adjectives have comparatives formed by periphrastic constructions, with the adverb more marking the comparative, and most marking the superlative: happier or more happy, the happiest or most happy.[166] There is some variation among speakers regarding which adjectives use inflected or periphrastic comparison, and some studies have shown a tendency for the periphrastic forms to become more common at the expense of the inflected form.[167] Pronouns, case and person English pronouns conserve many traits of case and gender inflection. The personal pronouns retain a difference between subjective and objective case in most persons (I/me, he/him, she/her, we/us, they/them) as well as a gender and animateness distinction in the third person singular (distinguishing he/she/it). The subjective case corresponds to the Old English nominative case, and the objective case is used both in the sense of the previous accusative case (in the role of patient, or direct object of a transitive verb), and in the sense of the Old English dative case (in the role of a recipient or indirect object of a transitive verb).[168][169] Subjective case is used when the pronoun is the subject of a finite clause, and otherwise the objective case is used.[170] While grammarians such as Henry Sweet[171] and Otto Jespersen[172] noted that the English cases did not correspond to the traditional Latin based system, some contemporary grammars, for example Huddleston & Pullum (2002), retain traditional labels for the cases, calling them nominative and accusative cases respectively. Possessive pronouns exist in dependent and independent forms; the dependent form functions as a determiner specifying a noun (as in my chair), while the independent form can stand alone as if it were a noun (e.g. the chair is mine).[173] The English system of grammatical person no longer has a distinction between formal and informal pronouns of address, and the forms for 2nd person plural and singular are identical except in the reflexive form. Some dialects have introduced innovative 2nd person plural pronouns such as y'all found in Southern American English and African American (Vernacular) English or youse and ye found in Irish English. English personal pronouns Person Subjective case Objective case Dependent possessive Independent possessive Reflexive 1st p. sg. I me my mine myself 2nd o. sg. you you your yours yourself 3rd p. sg. he/she/it him/her/it his/her/its his/hers/its himself/herself/itself 1st p. pl. we us our ours ourselves 2nd p. pl. you you your yours yourselves 3rd p. pl they them their theirs themselves Pronouns are used to refer to entities deictically or anaphorically. A deictic pronoun points to some person or object by identifying it relative to the speech situation — for example the pronoun I identifies the speaker, and the pronoun you, the addressee. Anaphorical pronouns such as that refer back to an entity already mentioned or assumed by the speaker to be known by the audience, for example in the sentence I already told you that. The reflexive pronouns are used when the oblique argument is identical to the subject of a phrase (e.g. "he sent it to himself" or "she braced herself for impact").[174] Prepositions Prepositional phrases (PP) are phrases composed of a preposition and one or more nouns, e.g. with the dog, for my friend, to school, in England. Prepositions have a wide range of uses in English. They are used to describe movement, place, and other relations between different entities, but they also have many syntactic uses such as introducing complement clauses and oblique arguments of verbs. For example, in the phrase I gave it to him, the preposition to marks the recipient, or Indirect Object of the verb to give. Traditionally words were only considered prepositions if they governed the case of the noun they preceded, for example causing the pronouns to use the objective rather than subjective form, "with her", "to me", "for us". But some contemporary grammars such as that of Huddleston & Pullum (2002:598–600) no longer consider government of case to be the defining feature of the class of prepositions, rather defining prepositions as words that can function as the heads of prepositional phrases. Verbs and verb phrases English verbs are inflected for tense and aspect, and marked for agreement with third person singular subject. Only the copula verb to be is still inflected for agreement with the plural and first and second person subjects.[166] Auxiliary verbs such as have and be are paired with verbs in the infinitive, past, or progressive forms. They form complex tenses, aspects, and moods. Auxiliary verbs differ from other verbs in that they can be followed by the negation, and in that they can occur as the first constituent in a question sentence.[175][176] Most verbs have six inflectional forms. The primary forms are a plain present, a third person singular present, and a preterite (past) form. The secondary forms are a plain form used for the infinitive, a gerund–participle and a past participle.[177] The copula verb to be is the only verb to retain some of its original conjugation, and takes different inflectional forms depending on the subject. The first person present tense form is am, the third person singular form is and the form are is used second person singular and all three plurals. The only verb past participle is been and its gerund-participle is being. English inflectional forms Inflection Strong Regular Plain present take love 3rd person sg. present takes loves Preterite took loved Plain (infinitive) take love Gerund–participle taking loving Past participle taken loved Tense, aspect and mood English has two primary tenses, past (preterit) and non-past. The preterit is inflected by using the preterit form of the verb, which for the regular verbs includes the suffix -ed, and for the strong verbs either the suffix -t or a change in the stem vowel. The non-past form is unmarked except in the third person singular, which takes the suffix -s.[175] Present Preterite First person I run I ran Second person You run You ran Third person John runs John ran English does not have a morphologised future tense.[178] Futurity of action is expressed periphrastically with one of the auxiliary verbs will or shall.[179] Many varieties also use a near future constructed with the phrasal verb be going to.[180] Future First person I will run Second person You will run Third person John will run Further aspectual distinctions are encoded by the use of auxiliary verbs, primarily have and be, which encode the contrast between a perfect and non-perfect past tense (I have run vs. I was running), and compound tenses such as preterite perfect (I had been running) and present perfect (I have been running).[181] For the expression of mood, English uses a number of modal auxiliaries, such as can, may, will, shall and the past tense forms could, might, would, should. There is also a subjunctive and an imperative mood, both based on the plain form of the verb (i.e. without the third person singular -s), and which is used in subordinate clauses (e.g. subjunctive: It is important that he run every day; imperative Run!).[179] An infinitive form, that uses the plain form of the verb and the preposition to, is used for verbal clauses that are syntactically subordinate to a finite verbal clause. Finite verbal clauses are those that are formed around a verb in the present or preterit form. In clauses with auxiliary verbs they are the finite verbs and the main verb is treated as a subordinate clause. For example, he has to go where only the auxiliary verb have is inflected for time and the main verb to go is in the infinitive, or in a complement clause such as I saw him leave, where the main verb is to see which is in a preterite form, and leave is in the infinitive. Phrasal verbs English also makes frequent use of constructions traditionally called phrasal verbs, verb phrases that are made up of a verb root and a preposition or particle which follows the verb. The phrase then functions as a single predicate. In terms of intonation the preposition is fused to the verb, but in writing it is written as a separate word. Examples of phrasal verbs are to get up, to ask out, to back up, to give up, to get together, to hang out, to put up with, etc. The phrasal verb frequently has a highly idiomatic meaning that is more specialised and restricted than what can be simply extrapolated from the combination of verb and preposition complement (e.g. lay off meaning terminate someone's employment).[182] In spite of the idiomatic meaning, some grammarians, including Huddleston & Pullum (2002):274, do not consider this type of construction to form a syntactic constituent and hence refrain from using the term "phrasal verb". Instead they consider the construction simply to be a verb with a prepositional phrase as its syntactic complement, i.e. he woke up in the morning and he ran up in the mountains are syntactically equivalent. Adverbs The function of adverbs is to modify the action or event described by the verb by providing additional information about the manner in which it occurs. Many adverbs are derived from adjectives with the suffix -ly, but not all, and many speakers tend to omit the suffix in the most commonly used adverbs. For example, in the phrase the woman walked quickly the adverb quickly derived from the adjective quick describes the woman's way of walking. Some commonly used adjectives have irregular adverbial forms, such as good which has the adverbial form well. Syntax In the English sentence The cat sat on the mat, the subject is the cat (a NP), the verb is sat, and on the mat is a prepositional phrase (composed of an NP the mat, and headed by the preposition on). The tree describes the structure of the sentence. Modern English syntax language is moderately analytic.[183] It has developed features such as modal verbs and word order as resources for conveying meaning. Auxiliary verbs mark constructions such as questions, negative polarity, the passive voice and progressive aspect. Basic constituent order English word order has moved from the Germanic verb-second (V2) word order to being almost exclusively subject–verb–object (SVO).[184] The combination of SVO order and use of auxiliary verbs often creates clusters of two or more verbs at the centre of the sentence, such as he had hoped to try to open it. In most sentences English only marks grammatical relations through word order.[185] The subject constituent precedes the verb and the object constituent follows it. The example below demonstrates how the grammatical roles of each constituent is marked only by the position relative to the verb: The dog bites the man S V O The man bites the dog S V O An exception is found in sentences where one of the constituents is a pronoun, in which case it is doubly marked, both by word order and by case inflection, where the subject pronoun precedes the verb and takes the subjective case form, and the object pronoun follows the verb and takes the objective case form. The example below demonstrates this double marking in a sentence where both object and subject is represented with a third person singular masculine pronoun: He hit him S V O Indirect objects (IO) of ditransitive verbs can be placed either as the first object in a double object construction (S V IO O), such as I gave Jane the book or in a prepositional phrase, such as I gave the book to Jane [186] Clause syntax Main article: English clause syntax In English a sentence may be composed of one or more clauses, that may in turn be composed of one or more phrases (e.g. Noun Phrases, Verb Phrases, and Prepositional Phrases). A clause is built around a verb, and includes its constituents, such as any NPs and PPs. Within a sentence one clause is always the main clause (or matrix clause) whereas other clauses are subordinate to it. Subordinate clauses may function as arguments of the verb in the main clause. For example, in the phrase I think (that) you are lying, the main clause is headed by the verb think, the subject is I, but the object of the phrase is the subordinate clause (that) you are lying. The subordinating conjunction that shows that the clause that follows is a subordinate clause, but it is often omitted.[187] Relative clauses are clauses that function as a modifier or specifier to some constituent in the main clause: For example, in the sentence I saw the letter that you received today, the relative clause that you received today specifies the meaning of the word letter, the object of the main clause. Relative clauses can be introduced by the pronouns who, whose, whom and which as well as by that (which can also be omitted.)[188] In contrast to many other Germanic languages there is no major differences between word order in main and subordinate clauses.[189] Auxiliary verb constructions Main articles: Do-support and Subject–auxiliary inversion English syntax relies on auxiliary verbs for many functions including the expression of tense, aspect and mood. Auxiliary verbs form main clauses, and the main verbs function as heads of a subordinate clause of the auxiliary verb. For example, in the sentence the dog did not find its bone, the clause find its bone is the complement of the negated verb did not. Subject–auxiliary inversion is used in many constructions, including focus, negation, and interrogative constructions. The verb do can be used as an auxiliary even in simple declarative sentences, where it usually serves to add emphasis, as in "I did shut the fridge." However, in the negated and inverted clauses referred to above, it is used because the rules of English syntax permit these constructions only when an auxiliary is present. Modern English does not allow the addition of the negating adverb not to an ordinary finite lexical verb, as in *I know not—it can only be added to an auxiliary (or copular) verb, hence if there is no other auxiliary present when negation is required, the auxiliary do is used, to produce a form like I do not (don't) know. The same applies in clauses requiring inversion, including most questions—inversion must involve the subject and an auxiliary verb, so it is not possible to say *Know you him?; grammatical rules require Do you know him?[190] Negation is done with the adverb not, which precedes the main verb and follows an auxiliary verb. A contracted form of not -n't can be used as an enclitic attaching to auxiliary verbs and to the copula verb to be. Just as with questions, many negative constructions require the negation to occur with do-support, thus in Modern English I don't know him is the correct answer to the question Do you know him?, but not *I know him not, although this construction may be found in older English.[191] Passive constructions also use auxiliary verbs. A passive construction rephrases an active construction in such a way that the object of the active phrase becomes the subject of the passive phrase, and the subject of the active phrase is either omitted or demoted to a role as an oblique argument introduced in a prepositional phrase. They are formed by using the past participle either with the auxiliary verb to be or to get, although not all varieties of English allow the use of passives with get. For example, putting the sentence she sees him into the passive becomes he is seen (by her), or he gets seen (by her).[192] Questions Both yes–no questions and wh-questions in English are mostly formed using subject–auxiliary inversion (Am I going tomorrow?, Where can we eat?), which may require do-support (Do you like her?, Where did he go?). In most cases, interrogative words (wh-words; e.g. what, who, where, when, why, how) appear in a fronted position. For example, in the question What did you see?, the word what appears as the first constituent despite being the grammatical object of the sentence. (When the wh-word is the subject or forms part of the subject, no inversion occurs: Who saw the cat?.) Prepositional phrases can also be fronted when they are the question's theme, e.g. To whose house did you go last night?. The personal interrogative pronoun who is the only interrogative pronoun to still show inflection for case, with the variant whom serving as the objective case form, although this form may be going out of use in many contexts.[193] Discourse level syntax At the discourse level English tends to use a topic-comment structure, where the known information (topic) precedes the new information (comment). Because of the strict SVO syntax, the topic of a sentence generally has to be the grammatical subject of the sentence. In cases where the topic is not the grammatical subject of the sentence, frequently the topic is promoted to subject position through syntactic means. One way of doing this is through a passive construction, the girl was stung by the bee. Another way is through a cleft sentence where the main clause is demoted to be a complement clause of a copula sentence with a dummy subject such as it or there, e.g. it was the girl that the bee stung, there was a girl who was stung by a bee.[194] Dummy subjects are also used in constructions where there is no grammatical subject such as with impersonal verbs (e.g., it is raining) or in existential clauses (there are many cars on the street). Through the use of these complex sentence constructions with informationally vacuous subjects, English is able to maintain both a topic comment sentence structure and a SVO syntax. Focus constructions emphasise a particular piece of new or salient information within a sentence, generally through allocating the main sentence level stress on the focal constituent. For example, the girl was stung by a bee (emphasising it was a bee and not for example a wasp that stung her), or The girl was stung by a bee (contrasting with another possibility, for example that it was the boy).[195] Topic and focus can also be established through syntactic dislocation, either preposing or postposing the item to be focused on relative to the main clause. For example, That girl over there, she was stung by a bee, emphasises the girl by preposition, but a similar effect could be achieved by postposition, she was stung by a bee, that girl over there, where reference to the girl is established as an "afterthought".[196] Cohesion between sentences is achieved through the use of deictic pronouns as anaphora (e.g. that is exactly what I mean where that refers to some fact known to both interlocutors, or then used to locate the time of a narrated event relative to the time of a previously narrated event).[197] Discourse markers such as oh, so or well, also signal the progression of ideas between sentences and help to create cohesion. Discourse markers are often the first constituents in sentences. Discourse markers are also used for stance taking in which speakers position themselves in a specific attitude towards what is being said, for example, no way is that true! (the idiomatic marker no way! expressing disbelief), or boy! I'm hungry (the marker boy expressing emphasis). While discourse markers are particularly characteristic of informal and spoken registers of English, they are also used in written and formal registers.[198] Vocabulary The vocabulary of English is vast, and counting exactly how many words English (or any language) has is impossible.[199][200][201] The Oxford Dictionaries suggest that there are at least a quarter of a million distinct English words.[199] Early studies of English vocabulary by lexicographers, the scholars who formally study vocabulary, compile dictionaries, or both, were impeded by a lack of comprehensive data on actual vocabulary in use from good-quality linguistic corpora,[202] collections of actual written texts and spoken passages. Many statements published before the end of the 20th century about the growth of English vocabulary over time, the dates of first use of various words in English, and the sources of English vocabulary will have to be corrected as new computerised analysis of linguistic corpus data becomes available.[201][203] Word formation processes English forms new words from existing words or roots in its vocabulary through a variety of processes. One of the most productive processes in English is conversion,[204] using a word with a different grammatical role, for example using a noun as a verb or a verb as a noun. Another productive word-formation process is nominal compounding,[201][203] producing compound words such as babysitter or ice cream or homesick.[204] A process more common in Old English than in Modern English, but still productive in Modern English, is the use of derivational suffixes (-hood, -ness, -ing, -ility) to derive new words from existing words (especially those of Germanic origin) or stems (especially for words of Latin or Greek origin). Formation of new words, called neologisms, based on Greek or Latin roots (for example television or optometry) is a highly productive process in English and in most modern European languages, so much so that it is often difficult to determine in which language a neologism originated. For this reason, lexicographer Philip Gove attributed many such words to the "international scientific vocabulary" (ISV) when compiling Webster's Third New International Dictionary (1961). Another active word-formation process in English is acronyms,[205] words formed by pronouncing as a single word abbreviations of longer phrases (e.g. NATO, laser). Word origins Main article: Lists of English loanwords by country or language of origin Source languages of English vocabulary[6][206] English, besides forming new words from existing words and their roots, also borrows words from other languages. This process of adding words from other languages is commonplace in many world languages, but English is characterised as being especially open to borrowing of foreign words throughout the last 1,000 years.[207] The most commonly used words in English are West Germanic.[208] The words in English learned first by children as they learn to speak, particularly the grammatical words that dominate the word count of both spoken and written texts, are the Germanic words inherited from the earliest periods of the development of Old English.[201] But one of the consequences of long language contact between French and English in all stages of their development is that the vocabulary of English has a very high percentage of "Latinate" words (derived from French, especially, and also from Latin or from other Romance languages).[209] French words from various periods of the development of French now make up one-third of the vocabulary of English.[210] English has also borrowed many words directly from Latin, the ancestor of the Romance languages, during all stages of its development.[203][201] Many of these words were earlier borrowed into Latin from Greek. Latin or Greek are still highly productive sources of stems used to form vocabulary of subjects learned in higher education such as the sciences, philosophy, and mathematics.[211] English continues to gain new loanwords and calques ("loan translations") from languages all over the world, and words from languages other than the ancestral Anglo-Saxon language make up about 60 percent of the vocabulary of English.[212] English has formal and informal speech registers, and informal registers, including child directed speech, tend to be made up predominantly of words of Anglo-Saxon origin, while the percentage of vocabulary that is of Latinate origin is higher in legal, scientific, and academic texts.[213][214] English loanwords and calques in other languages English has a strong influence on the vocabulary of other languages.[210][215] The influence of English comes from such factors as opinion leaders in other countries knowing the English language, the role of English as a world lingua franca, and the large number of books and films that are translated from English into other languages.[216] That pervasive use of English leads to a conclusion in many places that English is an especially suitable language for expressing new ideas or describing new technologies. Among varieties of English, it is especially American English that influences other languages.[217] Some languages, such as Chinese, write words borrowed from English mostly as calques, while others, such as Japanese, readily take in English loanwords written in sound-indicating script.[218] Dubbed films and television programmes are an especially fruitful source of English influence on languages in Europe.[218] Writing system See also: English alphabet, English braille, and English orthography Since the ninth century, English has been written in a Latin alphabet (also called Roman alphabet). Earlier Old English texts in Anglo-Saxon runes are only short inscriptions. The great majority of literary works in Old English that survive to today are written in the Roman alphabet.[30] The modern English alphabet contains 26 letters of the Latin script: a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, t, u, v, w, x, y, z (which also have capital forms: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W, X, Y, Z). The spelling system, or orthography, of English is multi-layered, with elements of French, Latin, and Greek spelling on top of the native Germanic system.[219] Further complications have arisen through sound changes with which the orthography has not kept pace.[42] Compared to European languages for which official organisations have promoted spelling reforms, English has spelling that is a less consistent indicator of pronunciation and standard spellings of words that are more difficult to guess from knowing how a word is pronounced.[220] There are also systematic spelling differences between British and American English. These situations have prompted proposals for spelling reform in English.[221] Although letters and speech sounds do not have a one-to-one correspondence in standard English spelling, spelling rules that take into account syllable structure, phonetic changes in derived words, and word accent are reliable for most English words.[222] Moreover, standard English spelling shows etymological relationships between related words that would be obscured by a closer correspondence between pronunciation and spelling, for example the words photograph, photography, and photographic,[222] or the words electricity and electrical. While few scholars agree with Chomsky and Halle (1968) that conventional English orthography is "near-optimal",[219] there is a rationale for current English spelling patterns.[223] The standard orthography of English is the most widely used writing system in the world.[224] Standard English spelling is based on a graphomorphemic segmentation of words into written clues of what meaningful units make up each word.[225] Readers of English can generally rely on the correspondence between spelling and pronunciation to be fairly regular for letters or digraphs used to spell consonant sounds. The letters b, d, f, h, j, k, l, m, n, p, r, s, t, v, w, y, z represent, respectively, the phonemes /b, d, f, h, d?, k, l, m, n, p, r, s, t, v, w, j, z/. The letters c and g normally represent /k/ and /?/, but there is also a soft c pronounced /s/, and a soft g pronounced /d?/. The differences in the pronunciations of the letters c and g are often signalled by the following letters in standard English spelling. Digraphs used to represent phonemes and phoneme sequences include ch for /t?/, sh for /?/, th for /?/ or /ð/, ng for /?/, qu for /kw/, and ph for /f/ in Greek-derived words. The single letter x is generally pronounced as /z/ in word-initial position and as /ks/ otherwise. There are exceptions to these generalisations, often the result of loanwords being spelled according to the spelling patterns of their languages of origin[222] or proposals by pedantic scholars in the early period of Modern English to mistakenly follow the spelling patterns of Latin for English words of Germanic origin.[226] For the vowel sounds of the English language, however, correspondences between spelling and pronunciation are more irregular. There are many more vowel phonemes in English than there are vowel letters (a, e, i, o, u, w, y). As a result of a smaller set of single letter symbols than the set of vowel phonemes, some "long vowels" are often indicated by combinations of letters (like the oa in boat, the ow in how, and the ay in stay), or the historically based silent e (as in note and cake).[223] The consequence of this complex orthographic history is that learning to read can be challenging in English. It can take longer for school pupils to become independently fluent readers of English than of many other languages, including Italian, Spanish, or German.[227] Nonetheless, there is an advantage for learners of English reading in learning the specific sound-symbol regularities that occur in the standard English spellings of commonly used words.[222] Such instruction greatly reduces the risk of children experiencing reading difficulties in English.[228][229] Making primary school teachers more aware of the primacy of morpheme representation in English may help learners learn more efficiently to read and write English.[230] English writing also includes a system of punctuation that is similar to the system of punctuation marks used in most alphabetic languages around the world. The purpose of punctuation is to mark meaningful grammatical relationships in sentences to aid readers in understanding a text and to indicate features important for reading a text aloud.[231] Dialects, accents, and varieties Main articles: List of dialects of the English language, World Englishes, and regional accents of English Dialectologists distinguish between English dialects, regional varieties that differ from each other in terms of grammar and vocabulary, and regional accents, distinguished by different patterns of pronunciation. The major native dialects of English are often divided by linguists into the two general categories of the British dialects (BrE) and those of North America (AmE).[232] There also exists a grouping of major native varieties of English in the southern hemisphere, the most prominent being Australian and New Zealand English. UK and Ireland See also: English language in England, Northern England English, Scots language, Scottish English, Welsh English, Estuary English, Ulster English, and Hiberno-English Map showing the main dialect regions in the UK and Ireland As the place where English first evolved, the British Isles, and particularly England, are home to the most variegated pattern of dialects. Within the United Kingdom, the Received Pronunciation (RP), an educated dialect of South East England, is traditionally used as the broadcast standard, and is considered the most prestigious of the British dialects. The spread of RP (also known as BBC English) through the media has caused many traditional dialects of rural England to recede, as youths adopt the traits of the prestige variety instead of traits from local dialects. At the time of the Survey of English Dialects, grammar and vocabulary differed across the country, but a process of lexical attrition has led most of this variation to disappear.[233] Nonetheless this attrition has mostly affected dialectal variation in grammar and vocabulary, and in fact only 3 percent of the English population actually speak RP, the remainder speaking regional accents and dialects with varying degrees of RP influence.[234] There is also variability within RP, particularly along class lines between Upper and Middle class RP speakers and between native RP speakers and speakers who adopt RP later in life.[235] Within Britain there is also considerable variation along lines of social class, and some traits though exceedingly common are considered "non-standard" and are associated with lower class speakers and identities. An example of this is H-dropping, which was historically a feature of lower class London English, particularly Cockney, but which today is the standard in all major English cities—yet it remains largely absent in broadcasting and among the upper crust of British society.[236] Speech example An example of an Essex male with a working-class Estuary accent (entertainer Russell Brand) Problems playing this file? See media help. English in England can be divided into four major dialect regions, Southwest English, South East English, Midlands English, and Northern English. Within each of these regions several local subdialects exist: Within the Northern region, there is a division between the Yorkshire dialects, and the Geordie dialect spoken in Northumbria around Newcastle, and the Lancashire dialects with local urban dialects in Liverpool (Scouse) and Manchester (Mancunian). Having been the centre of Danish occupation during the Viking Invasions, Northern English dialects, particularly the Yorkshire dialect, retain Norse features not found in other English varieties.[237] Since the 15th century, Southeastern varieties centred around London, which has been the centre from which dialectal innovations have spread to other dialects. In London, the Cockney dialect was traditionally used by the lower classes, and it was long a socially stigmatised variety. Today a large area of Southeastern England has adopted traits from Cockney, resulting in the so-called Estuary English which spread in areas south and East of London beginning in the 1980s. Estuary English is distinguished by traits such as the use of intrusive R (drawing is pronounced drawring /?dr??r??/), t-glottalisation (Potter is pronounced with a glottal stop as Po'er /po??/), and the pronunciation of th- as /f/ (thanks pronounced fanks) or /v/ (bother pronounced bover). [238] Speech example An example of a Scottish male with a middle-class Renfrewshire accent Problems playing this file? See media help. Scots is today considered a separate language from English, but it has its origins in early Northern Middle English[239] and developed and changed during its history with influence from other sources, particularly Scots Gaelic and Old Norse. Scots itself has a number of regional dialects. And in addition to Scots, Scottish English are the varieties of Standard English spoken in Scotland, most varieties are Northern English accents, with some influence from Scots.[240] In Ireland, various forms of English have been spoken since the Norman invasions of the 11th century. In County Wexford, in the area surrounding Dublin, two highly conservative dialects known as Forth and Bargy and Fingallian developed as offshoots from Early Middle English, and were spoken until the 19th century. Modern Hiberno-English however has its roots in English colonisation in the 17th century. Today Irish English is divided into Ulster English, a dialect with strong influence from Scots, and southern Hiberno-English. Like Scots and Northern English, the Irish accents preserve the rhoticity which has been lost in most dialects influenced by RP.[17][241] North America Main articles: American English, General American, African American Vernacular English, Southern American English, and Canadian English Rhoticity dominates in North American English. The Atlas of North American English found over 50% non-rhoticity, though, in at least one local white speaker in each U.S. metropolitan area designated here by a red dot. Non-rhotic African American Vernacular English pronunciations may be found among African Americans regardless of location. American English is fairly homogeneous compared to British English. Today, American accent variation is often increasing at the regional level and decreasing at the very local level,[242] though most Americans still speak within a phonological continuum of similar accents,[243] known collectively as General American (GA), with differences hardly noticed even among Americans themselves (such as Midland and Western American English).[244][245][246] In most American and Canadian English, rhoticity (or r-fulness) is dominant, with non-rhoticity (r-dropping) becoming associated with lower prestige and social class especially after World War II; this contrasts with the situation in England, where non-rhoticity has become the standard.[247] Separate from GA are American dialects with clearly distinct sound systems, historically including Southern American English, English of the coastal Northeast (famously including Eastern New England English and New York City English), and African American Vernacular English, all of which are historically non-rhotic. Canadian English, except for the Atlantic provinces and perhaps Quebec, may be classified under GA as well, but it often shows raising of certain vowels, /a?/ and /a?/, before voiceless consonants, as well as distinct norms for written and pronunciation standards.[248] In Southern American English, the largest American "accent group" outside of GA,[249] rhoticity now strongly prevails, replacing the region's historical non-rhotic prestige.[250][251][252] Southern accents are colloquially described as a "drawl" or "twang,"[253] being recognised most readily by the Southern Vowel Shift that begins with glide-deleting in the /a?/ vowel (e.g. pronouncing spy almost like spa), the "Southern breaking" of several front pure vowels into a gliding vowel or even two syllables (e.g. pronouncing the word "press" almost like "pray-us"),[254] the pin–pen merger, and other distinctive phonological, grammatical, and lexical features, many of which are actually recent developments of the 19th century or later.[255] Today spoken primarily by working- and middle-class African Americans, African American Vernacular English (AAVE) is also largely non-rhotic and likely originated among enslaved Africans and African Americans influenced primarily by the non-rhotic, non-standard English dialects of the Old South. A minority of linguists,[256] contrarily, propose that AAVE mostly traces back to African languages spoken by the slaves who had to develop a pidgin or Creole English to communicate with slaves of other ethnic and linguistic origins.[257] AAVE shares important commonalities with older Southern American English and so probably developed to a highly coherent and homogeneous variety in the 19th or early 20th century. AAVE is commonly stigmatised in North America as a form of "broken" or "uneducated" English, also common of modern Southern American English, but linguists today recognise both as fully developed varieties of English with their own norms shared by a large speech community.[258][259] Australia and New Zealand Main articles: Australian English and New Zealand English Since 1788, English has been spoken in Oceania, and Australian English has developed as a first language of the vast majority of the inhabitants of the Australian continent, its standard accent being General Australian. The English of neighbouring New Zealand has to a lesser degree become an influential standard variety of the language.[260] Australian and New Zealand English are most closely related to each other with few differentiating characteristics, followed by South African English and the English of southeastern England, all of which have similarly non-rhotic accents, aside from some accents in the South Island of New Zealand. Australian and New Zealand English stand out for their innovative vowels: many short vowels are fronted or raised, whereas many long vowels have diphthongised. Australian English also has a contrast between long and short vowels, not found in most other varieties. Australian English grammar aligns closely to British and American English; like American English, collective plural subjects take on a singular verb (as in the government is rather than are).[261][262] New Zealand English uses [?] for ?wh-? and its front vowels are often even higher than in Australian English.[263][264][265] Africa, the Caribbean, and South Asia See also: South African English, Caribbean English, and Indian English English is spoken widely in South Africa and is an official or co-official language in several countries. In South Africa, English has been spoken since 1820, co-existing with Afrikaans and various African languages such as the Khoe and Bantu languages. Today about 9 percent of the South African population speak South African English (SAE) as a first language. SAE is a non-rhotic variety, which tends to follow RP as a norm. It is alone among non-rhotic varieties in lacking intrusive r. There are different L2 varieties that differ based on the native language of the speakers.[266] Most phonological differences from RP are in the vowels.[267] Consonant differences include the tendency to pronounce /p, t, t??, k/ without aspiration (e.g. pin pronounced [p?n] rather than as [p??n] as in most other varieties), while r is often pronounced as a flap [?] instead of as the more common fricative.[268] Several varieties of English are also spoken in the Caribbean Islands that were colonial possessions of Britain, including Jamaica, and the Leeward and Windward Islands and Trinidad and Tobago, Barbados, the Cayman Islands, and Belize. Each of these areas are home both to a local variety of English and a local English based creole, combining English and African languages. The most prominent varieties are Jamaican English and Jamaican Creole. In Central America, English based creoles are spoken in on the Caribbean coasts of Nicaragua and Panama. [269] Locals are often fluent both in the local English variety and the local creole languages and code-switching between them is frequent, indeed another way to conceptualise the relationship between Creole and Standard varieties is to see a spectrum of social registers with the Creole forms serving as "basilect" and the more RP-like forms serving as the "acrolect", the most formal register.[270] Most Caribbean varieties are based on British English and consequently most are non-rhotic, except for formal styles of Jamaican English which are often rhotic. Jamaican English differs from RP in its vowel inventory, which has a distinction between long and short vowels rather than tense and lax vowels as in Standard English. The diphthongs /ei/ and /ou/ are monophthongs [e?] and [o?] or even the reverse diphthongs [ie] and [uo] (e.g. bay and boat pronounced [b?e?] and [b?o?t]). Often word final consonant clusters are simplified so that "child" is pronounced [t??ail] and "wind" [win].[271][272][273] As a historical legacy, Indian English tends to take RP as its ideal, and how well this ideal is realised in an individual's speech reflects class distinctions among Indian English speakers. Indian English accents are marked by the pronunciation of phonemes such as /t/ and /d/ (often pronounced with retroflex articulation as [?] and [?]) and the replacement of /?/ and /ð/ with dentals [t?] and [d?]. Sometimes Indian English speakers may also use spelling based pronunciations where the silent ?h? found in words such as ghost is pronounced as an Indian voiced aspirated stop [??].[274] References ^ OxfordLearner'sDictionary 2015, Entry: English – Pronunciation. ^ a b Crystal 2006, pp. 424–426. ^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin; Bank, Sebastian, eds. (2016). "Standard English". Glottolog 2.7. Jena: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History.  ^ Crystal 2003a, p. 6. ^ Wardhaugh 2010, p. 55. ^ a b Finkenstaedt, Thomas; Dieter Wolff (1973). Ordered profusion; studies in dictionaries and the English lexicon. C. Winter. ISBN 3-533-02253-6.  ^ a b Crystal 2003b, pp. 108–109. ^ a b Ethnologue 2010. ^ Crystal 2003b, p. 30. ^ "How English evolved into a global language". BBC. 20 December 2010. Retrieved 9 August 2015.  ^ The Routes of English 2015. ^ König 1994, p. 539. ^ Bammesberger 1992, pp. 29–30. ^ Bammesberger 1992, p. 30. ^ Robinson 1992. ^ Romaine 1982, pp. 56–65. ^ a b Barry 1982, pp. 86–87. ^ Durrell 2006. ^ König & van der Auwera 1994. ^ Harbert 2007. ^ Thomason & Kaufman 1988, pp. 264–265. ^ Watts 2011, Chapter 4. ^ Collingwood & Myres 1936. ^ Graddol, Leith & Swann et al. 2007. ^ Blench & Spriggs 1999. ^ Bosworth & Toller 1921. ^ Campbell 1959, p. 4. ^ Toon 1992, Chapter: Old English Dialects. ^ Donoghue 2008. ^ a b c Gneuss 2013, p. 23. ^ Denison & Hogg 2006, pp. 30–31. ^ Hogg 1992, Chapter 3. Phonology and Morphology. ^ Smith 2009. ^ Trask & Trask 2010. ^ a b Lass 2006, pp. 46–47. ^ Hogg 2006, pp. 360–361. ^ Thomason & Kaufman 1988, pp. 284–290. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 39. ^ Lass 1992. ^ Fischer & van der Wurff 2006, pp. 111–13. ^ Wycliffe, John. "Bible" (PDF). Wesley NNU.  ^ a b Lass 2000. ^ Görlach 1991, pp. 66–70. ^ Nevalainen & Tieken-Boon van Ostade 2006, pp. 274–79. ^ Cercignani 1981. ^ How English evolved into a global language 2010. ^ The Routes of English. ^ Romaine 2006, p. 586. ^ a b Mufwene 2006, p. 614. ^ a b Northrup 2013, pp. 81–86. ^ Baker, Colin (August 1998). "Encyclopedia of Bilingualism and Bilingual Education, page CCCXI". Multilingual Matters Ltd. Retrieved 9 August 2015.  ^ a b c Graddol 2006. ^ a b c Crystal 2003a. ^ a b McCrum, MacNeil & Cran 2003, pp. 9–10. ^ a b Romaine 1999, pp. 1–56. ^ Romaine 1999, p. 2. ^ Leech et al. 2009, pp. 18–19. ^ Mair & Leech 2006. ^ Mair 2006. ^ "Which countries are best at English as a second language?". World Economic Forum. Retrieved 29 November 2016.  ^ a b Crystal 2003a, p. 69. ^ "English". Ethnologue. Retrieved 2016-10-29.  ^ "Chinese, Mandarin". Ethnologue. Retrieved 2016-10-29.  ^ Crystal 2003b, p. 106. ^ a b Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 2. ^ a b Kachru 2006, p. 196. ^ a b Ryan 2013, Table 1. ^ Office for National Statistics 2013, Key Points. ^ National Records of Scotland 2013. ^ Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency 2012, Table KS207NI: Main Language. ^ Statistics Canada 2014. ^ Australian Bureau of Statistics 2013. ^ Statistics South Africa 2012, Table 2.5 Population by first language spoken and province (number). ^ Statistics New Zealand 2014. ^ a b c d Bao 2006, p. 377. ^ Rubino 2006. ^ Patrick 2006a. ^ Lim & Ansaldo 2006. ^ Connell 2006. ^ Schneider 2007. ^ a b Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 5. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 4. ^ European Commission 2012. ^ Kachru 2006, p. 197. ^ Kachru 2006, p. 198. ^ Bao 2006. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 7. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 2. ^ Romaine 1999. ^ Baugh & Cable 2002. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, pp. 8–9. ^ Ammon 2008, p. 1539. ^ Marsh, David (26 November 2010). "Lickety splits: two nations divided by a common language". The Guardian (UK). Retrieved 26 December 2015.  ^ Trudgill 2006. ^ Ammon 2008, pp. 1537–1539. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 122. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, pp. 5–6. ^ Deumert 2006, p. 130. ^ Deumert 2006, p. 131. ^ Crawford, James (1 February 2012). "Language Legislation in the U.S.A.". languagepolicy.net. Retrieved 29 May 2013.  ^ "States with Official English Laws". us-english.org. Retrieved 29 May 2013.  ^ Romaine 1999, p. 5. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 1. ^ Kachru 2006, p. 195. ^ Mazrui & Mazrui 1998. ^ Mesthrie 2010, p. 594. ^ Annamalai 2006. ^ Sailaja 2009, pp. 2–9. ^ "Indiaspeak: English is our 2nd language – The Times of India". The Times of India. Retrieved 5 January 2016.  ^ "Human Development in India: Challenges for a Society in Transition" (PDF). Oxford University Press. 2005. Retrieved 5 January 2016.  ^ Crystal 2004b. ^ Graddol 2010. ^ Meierkord 2006, p. 165. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006, p. 690–91. ^ a b Northrup 2013. ^ Wojcik 2006, p. 139. ^ International Maritime Organization 2011. ^ International Civil Aviation Organization 2011. ^ Gordin 2015. ^ Phillipson 2004, p. 47. ^ ConradRubal-Lopez 1996, p. 261. ^ Richter 2012, p. 29. ^ United Nations 2008. ^ Ammon 2006, p. 321. ^ European Commission 2012, pp. 21, 19. ^ Alcaraz Ariza & Navarro 2006. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006, p. 694–95. ^ Crystal 2002. ^ Jambor 2007. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, Chapter 12: English into the Future. ^ Crystal 2006. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006. ^ Li 2003. ^ Meierkord 2006, p. 163. ^ Wolfram 2006, pp. 334–335. ^ Carr & Honeybone 2007. ^ Bermúdez-Otero & McMahon 2006. ^ MacMahon 2006. ^ International Phonetic Association 1999, pp. 41–42. ^ König 1994, p. 534. ^ Collins & Mees 2003, pp. 47–53. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 13. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 41. ^ Brinton & Brinton 2010, pp. 56–59. ^ Collins & Mees 2003, pp. 46–50. ^ Brinton & Brinton 2010, p. 60. ^ König 1994, pp. 537–538. ^ International Phonetic Association 1999, p. 42. ^ Oxford Learner's Dictionary 2015, Entry "contract". ^ Merriam Webster 2015, Entry "contract". ^ Macquarie Dictionary 2015, Entry "contract". ^ Brinton & Brinton 2010, p. 66. ^ a b Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 4–6. ^ Roach 2009, p. 53. ^ Giegerich 1992, p. 36. ^ Lass 2000, p. 114. ^ Wells 1982, pp. xviii-xix. ^ Wells 1982, p. 493. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 22. ^ Aarts & Haegeman (2006), p. 118. ^ Payne & Huddleston 2002. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 56–57. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 55. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 54–5. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 57. ^ a b König 1994, p. 540. ^ Mair 2006, pp. 148–49. ^ Leech 2006, p. 69. ^ O'Dwyer 2006. ^ Greenbaum & Nelson 2002. ^ Sweet 2014, p. 52. ^ Jespersen 2007. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 425–26. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 426. ^ a b Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 51. ^ König 1994, p. 541. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 50. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 208–210. ^ a b Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 51–52. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 210–11. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 50–51. ^ Dixon 1982. ^ McArthur 1992, pp. 64, 610–611. ^ König 1994, p. 553. ^ König 1994, p. 550. ^ König 1994, p. 551. ^ Miller 2002, pp. 60–69. ^ König 1994, p. 545. ^ König 1994, p. 557. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 114. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 786–790. ^ Miller 2002, pp. 26–27. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 7-8. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 1365–70. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 1370. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 1366. ^ Halliday & Hasan 1976. ^ Schiffrin 1988. ^ a b HowManyWords 2015. ^ Sheidlower 2006. ^ a b c d e Algeo 1999. ^ Leech et al. 2009, pp. 24–50. ^ a b c Kastovsky 2006. ^ a b Crystal 2003b, p. 129. ^ Crystal 2003b, pp. 120–121. ^ "Joseph M. Willams, Origins of the English Language at". Amazon.com. Retrieved 2010-04-21.  ^ Denning, Kessler & Leben 2007, p. 7. ^ Nation 2001, p. 265. ^ Denning, Kessler & Leben 2007. ^ a b Gottlieb 2006, p. 196. ^ Romaine 1999, p. 4. ^ Fasold & Connor-Linton 2014, p. 302. ^ Crystal 2003b, pp. 124–127. ^ Algeo 1999, pp. 80–81. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006, p. 692. ^ Gottlieb 2006, p. 197. ^ Gottlieb 2006, p. 198. ^ a b Gottlieb 2006, p. 202. ^ a b Swan 2006, p. 149. ^ Mountford 2006. ^ Neijt 2006. ^ a b c d Daniels & Bright 1996, p. 653. ^ a b Abercrombie & Daniels 2006. ^ Mountford 2006, p. 156. ^ Mountford 2006, pp. 157–158. ^ Daniels & Bright 1996, p. 654. ^ Dehaene 2009. ^ McGuinness 1997. ^ Shaywitz 2003. ^ Mountford 2006, pp. 159. ^ Lawler 2006, p. 290. ^ Crystal 2003b, p. 107. ^ Trudgill 2000, p. 125. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 3. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 37. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 40. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 31. ^ Trudgill 2000, pp. 80–81. ^ Aitken & McArthur 1979, p. 81. ^ Romaine 1982. ^ Hickey 2007. ^ Labov 2012. ^ Wells 1982, p. 34. ^ Rowicka 2006. ^ Toon 1982. ^ Cassidy 1982. ^ Labov 1972. ^ Boberg 2010. ^ "Do You Speak American: What Lies Ahead". PBS. Retrieved 15 August 2007.  ^ Thomas, Erik R. (2003), "Rural White Southern Accents" (PDF), Atlas of North American English (online), Mouton de Gruyter, p. 16. [Later published as a chapter in: Bernd Kortmann and Edgar W. Schneider (eds) (2004). A Handbook of Varieties of English: A Multimedia Reference Tool. New York: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 300-324.]  ^ Levine & Crockett 1966. ^ Schönweitz 2001. ^ Montgomery 1993. ^ Thomas 2008, p. 95–96. ^ Bailey 1997. ^ McWhorter, John H. (2001). Word on the Street: Debunking the Myth of a "Pure" Standard English. Basic Books. p. 162.  ^ Bailey 2001. ^ Green 2002. ^ Patrick 2006b. ^ Eagleson 1982. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 16–21. ^ Burridge 2010. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 24–26. ^ Maclagan 2010. ^ Gordon, Campbell & Hay et al. 2004. ^ Lanham 1982. ^ Lass 2002. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 30–31. ^ Lawton 1982. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, p. 115. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 117–18. ^ Lawton 1982, p. 256–60. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 115–16. ^ Sailaja 2009, pp. 19–24. Bibliography Aarts, Bas; Haegeman, Liliane (2006). "6. English Word classes and Phrases". In Aarts, Bas; McMahon, April. The Handbook of English Linguistics. Blackwell Publishing Ltd.  Abercrombie, D.; Daniels, Peter T. (2006). "Spelling Reform Proposals: English". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04878-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Aitken, A. J.; McArthur, Tom, eds. (1979). Languages of Scotland. Occasional paper – Association for Scottish Literary Studies; no. 4. Edinburgh: Chambers. ISBN 978-0-550-20261-1.  Alcaraz Ariza, M. Á.; Navarro, F. (2006). "Medicine: Use of English". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 752–759. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/02351-8. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Algeo, John (1999). "Chapter 2:Vocabulary". In Romaine, Suzanne. Cambridge History of the English Language. IV: 1776–1997. Cambridge University Press. pp. 57–91. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521264778.003. ISBN 978-0-521-26477-8.  Ammon, Ulrich (November 2006). "Language Conflicts in the European Union: On finding a politically acceptable and practicable solution for EU institutions that satisfies diverging interests". International Journal of Applied Linguistics. 16 (3): 319–338. doi:10.1111/j.1473-4192.2006.00121.x.  Ammon, Ulrich (2008). "Pluricentric and Divided Languages". In Ammon, Ulrich N.; Dittmar, Norbert; Mattheier, Klaus J.; et al. Sociolinguistics: An International Handbook of the Science of Language and Society / Soziolinguistik Ein internationales Handbuch zur Wissenschaft vov Sprache and Gesellschaft. Handbooks of Linguistics and Communication Science / Handbücher zur Sprach- und Kommunikationswissenschaft 3/2. 2 (2nd completely revised and extended ed.). de Gruyter. ISBN 978-3-11-019425-8. Retrieved 19 December 2014 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Annamalai, E. (2006). "India: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 610–613. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04611-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Australian Bureau of Statistics (28 March 2013). "2011 Census QuickStats: Australia". Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Bailey, Guy (2001). "Chapter 3: The relationship between African American and White Vernaculars". In Lanehart, Sonja L. Sociocultural and historical contexts of African American English. Varieties of English around the World. John Benjamins. pp. 53–84. ISBN 978-1-58811-046-6.  Bailey, G. (1997). "When did southern American English begin". In Edgar W. Schneider. Englishes around the world. pp. 255–275.  Bammesberger, Alfred (1992). "Chapter 2: The Place of English in Germanic and Indo-European". In Hogg, Richard M. The Cambridge History of the English Language. 1: The Beginnings to 1066. Cambridge University Press. pp. 26–66. ISBN 978-0-521-26474-7.  Bao, Z. (2006). "Variation in Nonnative Varieties of English". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 377–380. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04257-7. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Barry, Michael V. (1982). "English in Ireland". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 84–134. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Bauer, Laurie; Huddleston, Rodney (15 April 2002). "Chapter 19: Lexical Word-Formation". In Huddleston, Rodney; Pullum, Geoffrey K. The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 1621–1721. ISBN 978-0-521-43146-0. Retrieved 10 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (10 February 2015).  Baugh, Albert C.; Cable, Thomas (2002). A History of the English Language (5th ed.). Longman. ISBN 978-0-13-015166-7.  Bermúdez-Otero, Ricardo; McMahon, April (2006). "Chapter 17: English phonology and morphology". In Bas Aarts; April McMahon. The Handbook of English Linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 382–410. doi:10.1111/b.9781405113823.2006.00018.x. ISBN 978-1-4051-6425-2. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  Blench, R.; Spriggs, Matthew (1999). Archaeology and Language: Correlating Archaeological and Linguistic Hypotheses. Routledge. pp. 285–286. ISBN 978-0-415-11761-6.  Boberg, Charles (2010). The English language in Canada: Status, history and comparative analysis. Studies in English Language. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-139-49144-0. Lay summary (2 April 2015).  Bosworth, Joseph; Toller, T. Northcote (1921). "Engla land". An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary (Online). Charles University. Retrieved 6 March 2015.  Brinton, Laurel J.; Brinton, Donna M. (2010). The linguistic structure of modern English. John Benjamins. ISBN 978-902728824-0. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  Brutt-Griffler, J. (2006). "Languages of Wider Communication". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 690–697. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00644-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Burridge, Kate (2010). "Chapter 7: English in Australia". In Kirkpatrick, Andy. The Routledge handbook of world Englishes. Routledge. pp. 132–151. ISBN 978-0-415-62264-6. Lay summary (29 March 2015).  Campbell, Alistair (1959). Old English Grammar. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-811943-7.  Carr, Philip; Honeybone, Patrick (2007). "English phonology and linguistic theory: an introduction to issues, and to 'Issues in English Phonology'". Language Sciences. 29 (2): 117–153. doi:10.1016/j.langsci.2006.12.018. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Cassidy, Frederic G. (1982). "Geographical Variation of English in the United States". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 177–210. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Cercignani, Fausto (1981). Shakespeare's works and Elizabethan pronunciation. Clarendon Press. Retrieved 14 March 2015. Lay summary (15 March 2015).  Collingwood, Robin George; Myres, J. N. L. (1936). "Chapter XX. The Sources for the period: Angles, Saxons, and Jutes on the Continent". Roman Britain and the English Settlements. Book V: The English Settlements. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press. LCCN 37002621. Lay summary (15 March 2015).  Collins, Beverley; Mees, Inger M. (2003) [First published 1981]. The Phonetics of English and Dutch (PDF) (5th ed.). Leiden: Brill Publishers. ISBN 9004103406.  Connell, B. A. (2006). "Nigeria: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 88–90. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01655-2. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 25 March 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Conrad, Andrew W.; Rubal-Lopez, Alma (1 January 1996). Post-Imperial English: Status Change in Former British and American Colonies, 1940–1990. de Gruyter. p. 261. ISBN 978-3-11-087218-7. Retrieved 2 April 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Crystal, David (2002). Language Death. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139106856. ISBN 978-1-139-10685-6. Retrieved 25 February 2015.  Crystal, David (2003a). English as a Global Language (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 69. ISBN 978-0-521-53032-3. Retrieved 4 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) – Library of Congress (sample) (4 February 2015).  Crystal, David (2003b). The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-53033-4. Retrieved 4 February 2015. Lay summary (4 February 2015).  Crystal, David (2004). "Subcontinent Raises Its Voice". The Guardian. Retrieved 4 February 2015.  Crystal, David (2006). "Chapter 9: English worldwide". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 420–439. ISBN 978-0-511-16893-2.  Daniels, Peter T.; Bright, William, eds. (6 June 1996). The World's Writing Systems. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-507993-7. Retrieved 23 February 2015. Lay summary (23 February 2015).  Dehaene, Stanislas (2009). Reading in the Brain: The Science and Evolution of a Human Invention. Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-02110-9. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Lay summary (3 April 2015).  Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. (2006). "Overview". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 30–31. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Denning, Keith; Kessler, Brett; Leben, William Ronald (17 February 2007). English Vocabulary Elements. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-516803-7. Retrieved 25 February 2015. Lay summary (25 February 2015).  Department for Communities and Local Government (United Kingdom) (27 February 2007). Second Report submitted by the United Kingdom pursuant to article 25, paragraph 1 of the framework convention for the protection of national minorities (PDF) (Report). Council of Europe. ACFC/SR/II(2007)003 rev1. Retrieved 6 March 2015.  Deumert, A. (2006). "Migration and Language". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 129–133. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01294-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Dixon, R. M. W. (1982). "The grammar of English phrasal verbs". Australian Journal of Linguistics. 2 (1): 1–42. doi:10.1080/07268608208599280.  Donoghue, D. (2008). Old English Literature: A Short Introduction. Wiley. doi:10.1002/9780470776025. ISBN 978-0-631-23486-9. Retrieved 16 March 2015.  Durrell, M. (2006). "Germanic Languages". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 53–55. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/02189-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Eagleson, Robert D. (1982). "English in Australia and New Zealand". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 415–438. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  "Summary by language size". Ethnologue: Languages of the World. Retrieved 10 February 2015.  European Commission (June 2012). Special Eurobarometer 386: Europeans and Their Languages (PDF) (Report). Eurobarometer Special Surveys. Retrieved 12 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (27 March 2015).  Fasold, Ralph W.; Connor-Linton, Jeffrey, eds. (2014). An Introduction to Language and Linguistics (Second ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-316-06185-5.  Fischer, Olga; van der Wurff, Wim (2006). "Chapter 3: Syntax". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 109–198. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Giegerich, Heinz J. (1992). English Phonology: An Introduction. Cambridge Textbooks in Linguistics. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-33603-1.  Gneuss, Helmut (2013). "Chapter 2: The Old English Language". In Godden, Malcolm; Lapidge, Michael. The Cambridge companion to Old English literature (Second ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 19–49. ISBN 978-0-521-15402-4.  Görlach, Manfred (1991). Introduction to Early Modern English. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-32529-3.  Gordin, Michael D. (4 February 2015). "Absolute English". Aeon. Retrieved 16 February 2015.  Gordon, Elizabeth; Campbell, Lyle; Hay, Jennifer; Maclagan, Margaret; Sudbury, Angela; Trudgill, Peter (2004). New Zealand English: its origins and evolution. Studies in English Language. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-10895-9.  Gottlieb, H. (2006). "Linguistic Influence". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 196–206. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04455-2. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Graddol, David (2006). English Next: Why global English may mean the end of 'English as a Foreign Language' (PDF). The British Council. Retrieved 7 February 2015. Lay summary – ELT Journal (7 February 2015).  Graddol, David (2010). English Next India: The future of English in India (PDF). The British Council. ISBN 978-0-86355-627-2. Retrieved 7 February 2015. Lay summary – ELT Journal (7 February 2015).  Graddol, David; Leith, Dick; Swann, Joan; Rhys, Martin; Gillen, Julia, eds. (2007). Changing English. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-37679-2. Retrieved 11 February 2015.  Green, Lisa J. (2002). African American English: a linguistic introduction. Cambridge University Press.  Greenbaum, S.; Nelson, G. (1 January 2002). An introduction to English grammar (Second ed.). Longman. ISBN 978-0-582-43741-8.  Halliday, M. A. K.; Hasan, Ruqaiya (1976). Cohesion in English. Pearson Education ltd.  Hancock, Ian F.; Angogo, Rachel (1982). "English in East Africa". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 415–438. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Harbert, Wayne (2007). The Germanic Languages. Cambridge Language Surveys. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511755071. ISBN 978-0-521-01511-0. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Lay summary – Language (journal of the Linguistic Society of America) (26 February 2015).  Hickey, R. (2007). Irish English: History and present-day forms. Cambridge University Press.  Hickey, R., ed. (2005). Legacies of colonial English: Studies in transported dialects. Cambridge University Press.  Hogg, Richard M. (1992). "Chapter 3: Phonology and Morphology". In Hogg, Richard M. The Cambridge History of the English Language. 1: The Beginnings to 1066. Cambridge University Press. pp. 67–168. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521264747. ISBN 978-0-521-26474-7.  Hogg, Richard M. (2006). "Chapter7: English in Britain". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 360–61. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  "How English evolved into a global language". BBC. 20 December 2010. Retrieved 9 August 2015.  "How many words are there in the English language?". Oxford Dictionaries Online. Oxford University Press. 2015. Retrieved 2 April 2015. How many words are there in the English language? There is no single sensible answer to this question. It's impossible to count the number of words in a language, because it's so hard to decide what actually counts as a word.  Huddleston, Rodney; Pullum, Geoffrey K. (15 April 2002). The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-43146-0. Retrieved 10 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (10 February 2015).  Hughes, Arthur; Trudgill, Peter (1996). English Accents and Dialects (3rd ed.). Arnold Publishers.  International Civil Aviation Organization (2011). "Personnel Licensing FAQ". International Civil Aviation Organization – Air Navigation Bureau. In which languages does a licence holder need to demonstrate proficiency?. Retrieved 16 December 2014. Controllers working on stations serving designated airports and routes used by international air services shall demonstrate language proficiency in English as well as in any other language(s) used by the station on the ground.  International Maritime Organization (2011). "IMO Standard Marine Communication Phrases". Retrieved 16 December 2014.  International Phonetic Association (1999). Handbook of the International Phonetic Association: A guide to the use of the International Phonetic Alphabet. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-65236-7.  Jambor, Paul Z. (December 2007). "English Language Imperialism: Points of View". Journal of English as an International Language. 2: 103–123.  Jespersen, Otto (2007) [1924]. "Case: The number of English cases". The Philosophy of Grammar. Routledge.  Kachru, B. (2006). "English: World Englishes". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 195–202. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00645-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Kastovsky, Dieter (2006). "Chapter 4: Vocabulary". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 199–270. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  König, Ekkehard; van der Auwera, Johan, eds. (1994). The Germanic Languages. Routledge Language Family Descriptions. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-28079-2. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Lay summary (26 February 2015).  The survey of the Germanic branch languages includes chapters by Winfred P. Lehmann, Ans van Kemenade, John Ole Askedal, Erik Andersson, Neil Jacobs, Silke Van Ness, and Suzanne Romaine. König, Ekkehard (1994). "17. English". In König, Ekkehard; van der Auwera, Johan. The Germanic Languages. Routledge Language Family Descriptions. Routledge. pp. 532–562. ISBN 978-0-415-28079-2. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Lay summary (26 February 2015).  Labov, W. (1972). "13. The Social Stratification of (R) in New York City Department Stores". Sociolinguistic patterns. University of Pennsylvania Press.  Labov, W. (2012). "1. About Language and Language Change". Dialect Diversity in America: The Politics of Language Change. University of Virginia Press.  Labov, William; Ash, Sharon; Boberg, Charles (2006). The Atlas of North American English. Berlin: de Gruyter. ISBN 3-11-016746-8. Retrieved 2 April 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Lanham, L. W. (1982). "English in South Africa". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 324–352. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Lass, Roger (1992). "2. Phonology and Morphology". In Blake, Norman. Cambridge History of the English Language. II: 1066–1476. Cambridge University Press. pp. 103–123.  Lass, Roger (2000). "Chapter 3: Phonology and Morphology". In Lass, Roger. The Cambridge History of the English Language, Volume III: 1476–1776. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 56–186.  Lass, Roger (2002), "South African English", in Mesthrie, Rajend, Language in South Africa, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-79105-2  Lass, Roger (2006). "Chapter 2: Phonology and Morphology". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 46–47. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Lawler, J. (2006). "Punctuation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 290–291. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04573-9. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Lawton, David L. (1982). "English in the Caribbean". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 251–280. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Leech, G. N. (2006). A glossary of English grammar. Edinburgh University Press.  Leech, Geoffrey; Hundt, Marianne; Mair, Christian; Smith, Nicholas (22 October 2009). Change in contemporary English: a grammatical study (PDF). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86722-1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 22 September 2016. Lay summary (PDF) (29 March 2015).  Levine, L.; Crockett, H. J. (1966). "Speech Variation in a Piedmont Community: Postvocalic r*". Sociological Inquiry. 36 (2): 204–226. doi:10.1111/j.1475-682x.1966.tb00625.x.  Li, David C. S. (2003). "Between English and Esperanto: what does it take to be a world language?". International Journal of the Sociology of Language. 2003 (164): 33–63. doi:10.1515/ijsl.2003.055. ISSN 0165-2516. Retrieved 27 March 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Lim, L.; Ansaldo, U. (2006). "Singapore: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of Language & Linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 387–389. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01701-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Maclagan, Margaret (2010). "Chapter 8: The English(es) of New Zealand". In Kirkpatrick, Andy. The Routledge handbook of world Englishes. Routledge. pp. 151–164. ISBN 978-0-203-84932-3. Lay summary (29 March 2015).  MacMahon, M. K. (2006). "16. English Phonetics". In Bas Aarts; April McMahon. The Handbook of English Linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 359–382.  "Macquarie Dictionary". Australia's National Dictionary & Thesaurus Online | Macquarie Dictionary. Macmillan Publishers Group Australia. 2015. Retrieved 15 February 2015. (registration required (help)).  Mair, C.; Leech, G. (2006). "14 Current Changes in English Syntax". The handbook of English linguistics.  Mair, Christian (2006). Twentieth-century English: History, variation and standardization. Cambridge University Press.  Mazrui, Ali A.; Mazrui, Alamin (3 August 1998). The Power of Babel: Language and Governance in the African Experience. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-51429-1. Retrieved 15 February 2015. Lay summary (15 February 2015).  McArthur, Tom, ed. (1992). The Oxford Companion to the English Language. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-214183-5. Lay summary (15 February 2015).  McCrum, Robert; MacNeil, Robert; Cran, William (2003). The Story of English (Third Revised ed.). London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-200231-5.  McGuinness, Diane (1997). Why Our Children Can't Read, and what We Can Do about it: A Scientific Revolution in Reading. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-83161-9. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Lay summary (3 April 2015).  Meierkord, C. (2006). "Lingua Francas as Second Languages". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 163–171. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00641-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) "English". Merriam-webster.com. 26 February 2015. Retrieved 26 February 2015.  Mesthrie, Rajend (2010). "New Englishes and the native speaker debate". Language Sciences. 32: 594–601. doi:10.1016/j.langsci.2010.08.002. ISSN 0388-0001. Retrieved 17 February 2015.  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Miller, Jim (2002). An Introduction to English Syntax. Edinburgh University Press.  Montgomery, M. (1993). "The Southern Accent—Alive and Well". Southern Cultures. 1 (1): 47–64.  Mountford, J. (2006). "English Spelling: Rationale". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 156–159. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05018-5. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Mufwene, S. S. (2006). "Language Spread". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 613–616. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01291-8. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Nation, I. S. P. (15 March 2001). Learning Vocabulary in Another Language. Cambridge University Press. p. 477. ISBN 0-521-80498-1. Retrieved 4 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (4 February 2015).  National Records of Scotland (26 September 2013). "Census 2011: Release 2A". Scotland's Census 2011. Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Neijt, A. (2006). "Spelling Reform". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 68–71. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04574-0. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Nevalainen, Terttu; Tieken-Boon van Ostade, Ingrid (2006). "Chapter 5: Standardization". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency (11 December 2012). "Census 2011: Key Statistics for Northern Ireland December 2012" (PDF). Statistics Bulletin. Table KS207NI: Main Language. Retrieved 16 December 2014.  Northrup, David (20 March 2013). How English Became the Global Language. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-137-30306-6. Retrieved 25 March 2015. Lay summary (25 March 2015).  O'Dwyer, Bernard (2006). Modern English Structures, second edition: Form, Function, and Position. Broadview Press.  Office for National Statistics (4 March 2013). "Language in England and Wales, 2011". 2011 Census Analysis. Retrieved 16 December 2014.  "Oxford Learner's Dictionaries". Oxford. Retrieved 25 February 2015.  Patrick, P. L. (2006a). "Jamaica: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 88–90. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01760-0. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Patrick, P. L. (2006b). "English, African-American Vernacular". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 159–163. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05092-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Payne, John; Huddleston, Rodney (2002). "5. Nouns and noun phrases". In Huddleston, R.; Pullum, G. K. The Cambridge Grammar of English. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 323–522.  Phillipson, Robert (28 April 2004). English-Only Europe?: Challenging Language Policy. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-44349-9. Retrieved 15 February 2015.  Richter, Ingo (1 January 2012). "Introduction". In Richter, Dagmar; Richter, Ingo; Toivanen, Reeta; et al. Language Rights Revisited: The challenge of global migration and communication. BWV Verlag. ISBN 978-3-8305-2809-8. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  Roach, Peter (1991). English Phonetics and Phonology (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.  Roach, Peter (2009). English Phonetics and Phonology (4th ed.). Cambridge.  Robinson, Orrin (1992). Old English and Its Closest Relatives: A Survey of the Earliest Germanic Languages. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-2221-6. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Romaine, Suzanne (1982). "English in Scotland". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 56–83. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Romaine, Suzanne (1999). "Chapter 1: Introduction". In Romaine, Suzanne. Cambridge History of the English Language. IV: 1776–1997. Cambridge University Press. pp. 1–56. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521264778.002. ISBN 978-0-521-26477-8.  Romaine, S. (2006). "Language Policy in Multilingual Educational Contexts". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 584–596. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00646-5. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) "The Routes of English". 1 August 2015.  Rowicka, G. J. (2006). "Canada: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 194–195. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01848-4. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Rubino, C. (2006). "Philippines: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 323–326. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01736-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Ryan, Camille (August 2013). "Language Use in the United States: 2011" (PDF). American Community Survey Reports. p. 1. Retrieved 16 December 2014.  Sailaja, Pingali (2009). Indian English. Dialects of English. Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 978-0-7486-2595-6. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Schiffrin, Deborah (1988). Discourse Markers. Studies in Interactional Sociolinguistics. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-35718-0. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Schneider, Edgar (2007). Postcolonial English: Varieties Around the World. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-53901-2. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Schönweitz, Thomas (2001). "Gender and Postvocalic /r/ in the American South: A Detailed Socioregional Analysis". American Speech. 76 (3): 259–285. doi:10.1215/00031283-76-3-259.  Shaywitz, Sally E. (2003). Overcoming Dyslexia: A New and Complete Science-based Program for Reading Problems at Any Level. A.A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-375-40012-4. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Lay summary (3 April 2015).  Sheidlower, Jesse (10 April 2006). "How many words are there in English?". Retrieved 2 April 2015. The problem with trying to number the words in any language is that it's very hard to agree on the basics. For example, what is a word?  Smith, Jeremy J. (2 April 2009). Old English: a linguistic introduction. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86677-4.  Statistics Canada (22 August 2014). "Population by mother tongue and age groups (total), 2011 counts, for Canada, provinces and territories". Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Statistics New Zealand (April 2014). "2013 QuickStats About Culture and Identity" (PDF). p. 23. Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Lehohla, Pali, ed. (2012). "Population by first language spoken and province" (PDF). Census 2011: Census in Brief (PDF). Pretoria: Statistics South Africa. p. 23. ISBN 978-0-621-41388-5. Report No. 03?01?41. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 November 2015.  Svartvik, Jan; Leech, Geoffrey (12 December 2006). English – One Tongue, Many Voices. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-4039-1830-7. Retrieved 5 March 2015. Lay summary (16 March 2015).  Swan, M. (2006). "English in the Present Day (Since ca. 1900)". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 149–156. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05058-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Sweet, Henry (2014) [1892]. A New English Grammar. Cambridge University Press.  Thomas, Erik R. (2008). "Rural Southern white accents". In Edgar W. Schneider. Varieties of English. 2: The Americas and the Caribbean. de Gruyter. pp. 87–114. Retrieved 2 April 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Thomason, Sarah G.; Kaufman, Terrence (1988). Language Contact, Creolization and Genetic Linguistics. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-91279-3.  Todd, Loreto (1982). "The English language in West Africa". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 281–305. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Toon, Thomas E. (1982). "Variation in Contemporary American English". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 210–250. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Toon, Thomas E. (1992). "Old English Dialects". In Hogg, Richard M. The Cambridge History of the English Language. 1: The Beginnings to 1066. Cambridge University Press. pp. 409–451. ISBN 978-0-521-26474-7.  Trask, Larry; Trask, Robert Lawrence (January 2010). Why Do Languages Change?. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83802-3. Retrieved 5 March 2015.  Trudgill, Peter (2000). The Dialects of England (2nd ed.). Oxford: Blackwell. ISBN 978-0-631-21815-9. Lay summary (27 March 2015).  Trudgill, P. (2006). "Accent". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. p. 14. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01506-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Trudgill, Peter; Hannah, Jean (2002). International English: A Guide to the Varieties of Standard English (4th ed.). London: Hodder Education. ISBN 0-340-80834-9.  Trudgill, Peter; Hannah, Jean (1 January 2008). International English: A Guide to the Varieties of Standard English (5th ed.). London: Arnold. ISBN 978-0-340-97161-1. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 26 March 2015. Lay summary (26 March 2015).  United Nations (2008). "Everything You Always Wanted to Know About the United Nations" (PDF). Retrieved 4 April 2015. The working languages at the UN Secretariat are English and French.  Wardhaugh, Ronald (2010). An Introduction to Sociolinguistics. Blackwell textbooks in Linguistics; 4 (Sixth ed.). Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4051-8668-1.  Watts, Richard J. (3 March 2011). Language Myths and the History of English. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195327601.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-532760-1. Retrieved 10 March 2015. Lay summary (10 March 2015).  Wells, J.C. (1982). Accents of English, I, II, III. Cambridge University Press.  Wojcik, R. H. (2006). "Controlled Languages". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 139–142. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05081-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Wolfram, W. (2006). "Variation and Language: Overview". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of Language & Linguistics. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 333–341. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04256-5. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) External links Find more aboutEnglish languageat Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Textbooks from Wikibooks Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Accents of English from Around the World (University of Edinburgh) Sound files comparing how 110 words are pronounced in 50 English accents from around the world Articles related to the English language Linguistics v t e Description of the English language Grammar Phonology Stress and reduced vowels Orthography Alphabet Braille Dialects Language history Phonological history v t e History of English Proto-Indo-European Proto-Germanic Proto-West-Germanic Anglo-Frisian languages Old English Anglo-Norman language Middle English Early Modern English Modern English Phonological history General Old English Vowels Great Vowel Shift low unrounded vowels low back vowels high back vowels high front vowels diphthongs changes before historic /l/ changes before historic /r/ trisyllabic laxing Northern Cities Vowel Shift Consonants rhoticity flapping t-glottalization l-vocalization consonant clusters h-dropping wh th th-fronting ð (eth) þ (thorn) th-stopping v t e Dialects and accents of Modern English by continent Europe United Kingdom England   Varieties by common name Barrovian Black Country Brummie Bristolian Cheshire Cockney "Mockney" Cornish Cumbrian East Anglian East Midlands Essex Estuary Geordie Kentish Lancastrian Mackem Mancunian Multicultural London Norfolk Northern Pitmatic Potteries Received Pronunciation Scouse Southern Suffolk Sussex West Country "Mummerset" West Midlands Yorkshire   Varieties by geographic location East of England Essex Norfolk Suffolk East Midlands North Cheshire Cumbria [Barrow] Lancashire Manchester Merseyside Sunderland Tyneside Yorkshire South Kent Thames Estuary; London [Multicultural London] Sussex West Country Bristol Cornwall Dorset West Midlands Black Country Birmingham Stoke-on-Trent Northern Ireland Mid Ulster Ulster Scots Scotland Glasgow Highlands Lowlands Wales Cardiff Gower Ireland Dublin D4 South-West Cork Supraregional Ulster Channel Islands Alderney Guernsey Jersey Elsewhere Gibraltar Isle of Man Malta North and South America United States   Varieties by common name African American Appalachian Boston Cajun California Chicago; Detroit; Great Lakes Chicano Mid-Atlantic Philadelphia; South Jersey Baltimorese General American High Tider Maine Miami Midland Midwestern New England New Mexican New York Northeast Pennsylvania Old Southern Ozark Pacific Northwest Pennsylvania Dutch Pittsburghese Rhode Island Southern Texan Upper Midwestern Western Vermont Yat Yeshivish Yooper   Varieties by geographic location Delaware Valley; Mid-Atlantic Pennsylvania Dutch Philadelphia; South Jersey Baltimore Midland Midwest Great Lakes; Inland North Upper Midwest Upper Peninsula of Michigan New England Boston Maine Rhode Island Vermont New York City; North Jersey New York Latino North Northeast Pennsylvania South Acadiana Appalachia Chesapeake; Pamlico Miami New Orleans Ozarks Texas West California New Mexico Pacific Northwest Western Pennsylvania Canada Aboriginal Atlantic Cape Breton Newfoundland Lunenburg Standard Ottawa Valley Pacific Northwest Quebec Caribbean Bahamas Barbados Dominican Republic Jamaica Puerto Rico Trinidad Elsewhere Bermuda Falkland Islands Guyana Oceania Australia Aboriginal Broad; Strine General South Australian Torres Strait West Australian Elsewhere Fiji New Zealand Palau Solomon Islands Other continents Africa Cameroon Ghana Kenya Liberia Malawi Namibia Nigeria Sierra Leone South Africa Afrikaans Black Cape Flats Indian White Uganda Asia Bangladesh Brunei Burma or Myanmar Hong Kong India Malaysia Nepal Pakistan Philippines Singapore Sri Lanka v t e Modern Germanic languages and dialects North Germanic West Scandinavian Bergensk Elfdalian Faroese Gøtudanskt Icelandic Jamtlandic Norwegian Bokmål Nynorsk Sognamål Trøndersk Valdris Vestlandsk Vikværsk East Scandinavian Bornholmsk Dalecarlian Danish Insular Danish Jutlandic South Perkerdansk Gutnish Kalix Kebabnorsk Kiruna Luleå Norrland Småländska South Swedish Scanian Stockholm Rinkeby Uppländska Västgötska Westrobothnian Swedish Åland Estonia Finland Ostrobothnia West Germanic Anglo- Frisian English English dialects North Frisian Saterland Frisian Scots West Frisian Low Franconian Dutch Hollandic West Flemish Zeelandic East Flemish Brabantian Limburgish Meuse-Rhenish Afrikaans Low German/ Low Saxon Dutch Low Saxon Northern Low Saxon Westphalian Eastphalian Mecklenburgisch-Vorpommersch Brandenburgisch East Pomeranian Central Pomeranian Low Prussian High German Standard German German Swiss Austrian Central German Ripuarian Moselle Franconian Luxembourgish Lorraine Franconian Rhine Franconian Hessian Thuringian Upper Saxon High Prussian Lausitzisch-neumärkisch Silesian Upper German East Franconian South Franconian Northern Bavarian Central Bavarian Southern Bavarian Swabian Low Alemannic Central Alemannic High Alemannic Highest Alemannic Swiss German Yiddish v t e Dictionaries of English Old and Middle English An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary Dictionary of Old English Middle English Dictionary Historic Catholicon Anglicum (1483) The English Schoole-Master (1596) The New World of English Words (1658) A New English Dictionary (1702) An Universal Etymological English Dictionary (1721) A Dictionary of the English Language (1755) Webster's Dictionary (1828) Worcester's Dictionary Richardson's New Dictionary Imperial Dictionary (1847–50) Century Dictionary (1889–91) American English American Heritage Dictionary of American English Dictionary of American Regional English Encarta New Oxford American Oxford American Random House Webster's Webster's New World Webster's Third New International Dictionary World Book Dictionary British English Chambers Collins Oxford English Concise Oxford English Compact Oxford English Shorter Oxford English Historical Thesaurus Oxford Dictionary of English Penguin Canadian English Canadian Oxford Dictionary of Canadianisms Gage Canadian (Full list) Australian English Australian National Australian Oxford Macquarie Online Wiktionary Collaborative International Dictionary of English OmegaWiki Urban Dictionary Wordnik Learners / ESL Cambridge Advanced Learner's Collins COBUILD Advanced Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners Merriam-Webster's Advanced Learner's Oxford Advanced Learner's Geopolitical use v t e English-speaking world Click on a coloured area to see an article about English in that country or region Further links Articles English-speaking world History of the English language British Empire English in the Commonwealth of Nations Lists List of countries by English-speaking population List of countries where English is an official language   Countries and territories where English is the national language or the native language of the majority Africa Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Americas Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda The Bahamas Barbados Belize Bermuda British Virgin Islands Canada Cayman Islands Dominica Falkland Islands Grenada Guyana Jamaica Montserrat Saba Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Trinidad and Tobago Turks and Caicos Islands United States United States Virgin Islands Europe Guernsey Ireland Isle of Man Jersey United Kingdom Oceania Australia New Zealand Norfolk Island Pitcairn Islands   Countries and territories where English is an official language, but not the majority first language Africa Botswana Cameroon The Gambia Ghana Kenya Lesotho Liberia Malawi Mauritius Namibia Nigeria Rwanda Sierra Leone Somaliland South Africa South Sudan Sudan Swaziland Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Americas Puerto Rico Asia Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Special Administrative Region India Pakistan Philippines Singapore Europe Gibraltar Malta Oceania American Samoa Cook Islands Fiji Guam Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru Niue Northern Mariana Islands Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tokelau Tuvalu Vanuatu Dependencies shown in italics. Authority control GND: 4014777-0 SUDOC: 027219232 NDL: 00561788 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=English_language&oldid=777197756" Categories: Analytic languages English language English languages Fusional languages Germanic languages Languages of American Samoa Languages of Antigua and Barbuda Languages of Australia Languages of Belize Languages of Bermuda Languages of Botswana Languages of Cameroon Languages of Canada Languages of Fiji Languages of Ghana Languages of Grenada Languages of Guam Languages of Guyana Languages of Hong Kong Languages of India Languages of Ireland Languages of Jamaica Languages of Kenya Languages of Kiribati Languages of Lesotho Languages of Liberia Languages of Malawi Languages of Malaysia Languages of Malta Languages of Mauritius Languages of Namibia Languages of Nauru Languages of New Zealand Languages of Nigeria Languages of Niue Languages of Pakistan Languages of Palau Languages of Papua New Guinea Languages of Rwanda Languages of Saint Kitts and Nevis Languages of Saint Lucia Languages of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Languages of Samoa Languages of Seychelles Languages of Sierra Leone Languages of Singapore Languages of South Africa Languages of South Sudan Languages of Sudan Languages of Swaziland Languages of the Bahamas Languages of the British Virgin Islands Languages of the Cayman Islands Languages of the Marshall Islands Languages of the Philippines Languages of the Pitcairn Islands Languages of the Solomon Islands Languages of the United Kingdom Languages of the United States Virgin Islands Languages of the United States Languages of Tokelau Languages of Trinidad and Tobago Languages of Uganda Languages of Vanuatu Languages of Zambia Languages of Zimbabwe Stress-timed languages Subject–verb–object languages Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Good articles Use dmy dates from February 2016 EngvarB from July 2014 Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code ISO language articles citing sources other than Ethnologue Articles including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Old English-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016 Articles with hAudio microformats Pages containing links to subscription-or-libraries content Pages containing links to subscription-only content Pages with login required references or sources Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiquote Languages Acèh ???????? ???????? Afrikaans Akan Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés ????? Armãneashti Arpetan ??????? Asturianu Avañe'? ???? Aymar aru Az?rbaycanca ?????? Bamanankan ????? Bahasa Banjar Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ??????? Bikol Central ????????? Boarisch ??????? Bosanski Brezhoneg ?????? Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski Eesti ???????? Emiliàn e rumagnòl ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara E?egbe ????? Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ?? ????? ??????? ?????? ?????? ?????? / Gõychi Konknni ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hawai?i ??????? ?????? Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue ??????/inuktitut ???? IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kalaallisut ????? Kapampangan ????????-??????? ??????? ????? / ????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Kinyarwanda Kiswahili ???? Kongo Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî ???????? ????? ???? Ladino ????? ????? ??? ???? ?????? Latga?u Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Ligure Limburgs Lingála La .lojban. Lumbaart Magyar ?????? ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ????????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-d??ng-ng?? Mirandés ??????? ?????? ?????????? N?huatl Dorerin Naoero Nederlands Nedersaksies N?hiyaw?win / ??????? ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norfuk / Pitkern Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? Pälzisch Pangasinan ?????? Papiamentu ???? Patois ????? ???? ????????? Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Q?r?mtatarca Reo tahiti Ripoarisch Român? Rumantsch Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sámegiella Gagana Samoa ????????? Sängö Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sesotho Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana Shqip Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? SiSwati Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????????? / ?????????? ?l?nski Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Sranantongo ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Taqbaylit Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ?????? ??? ?????? ??? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe Twi ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? ???? ???????? / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Võro Walon ?? West-Vlams Winaray Wolof ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zazaki Zeêuws Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 25 April 2017, at 19:48. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Arts |||Portal:Arts From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Shortcuts: P:A P:ARTS Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Sociology portals: Arts · Anthropology · Community · Culture · Economics · Education · Geography · Gender studies · Globalization · History · Human rights · Internet · Law · Philosophy · Social movements · Social sciences · Social welfare and social work · Society edit   The Arts Portal Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts The arts is a vast subdivision of culture, composed of many creative endeavors and disciplines. It is a broader term than "art", which, as a description of a field, usually means only the visual arts. The arts encompass the visual arts, the literary arts and the performing arts – music, theatre, dance and film, among others. This list is by no means comprehensive, but only meant to introduce the concept of the arts. For all intents and purposes, the history of the arts begins with the history of art. The arts might have origins in early human evolutionary prehistory. Ancient Greek art saw the veneration of the animal form and the development of equivalent skills to show musculature, poise, beauty and anatomically correct proportions. Ancient Roman art depicted gods as idealized humans, shown with characteristic distinguishing features (e.g. Jupiter's thunderbolt). In Byzantine and Gothic art of the Middle Ages, the dominance of the church insisted on the expression of biblical and not material truths. Eastern art has generally worked in a style akin to Western medieval art, namely a concentration on surface patterning and local colour (meaning the plain colour of an object, such as basic red for a red robe, rather than the modulations of that colour brought about by light, shade and reflection). A characteristic of this style is that the local colour is often defined by an outline (a contemporary equivalent is the cartoon). This is evident in, for example, the art of India, Tibet and Japan. Religious Islamic art forbids iconography, and expresses religious ideas through geometry instead. The physical and rational certainties depicted by the 19th-century Enlightenment were shattered not only by new discoveries of relativity by Einstein and of unseen psychology by Freud, but also by unprecedented technological development. Paradoxically the expressions of new technologies were greatly influenced by the ancient tribal arts of Africa and Oceania, through the works of Paul Gauguin and the Post-Impressionists, Pablo Picasso and the Cubists, as well as the Futurists and others. More about The arts... View new selections below (purge) edit   Featured article Louis Lambert is a French novel by Honoré de Balzac (1799–1850), included in the Études philosophiques section of his novel sequence La Comédie humaine. Set mostly in a school at Vendôme, it examines the life and theories of a boy genius fascinated by the Swedish philosopher Emanuel Swedenborg (1688–1772). Balzac wrote Louis Lambert during the summer of 1832 while he was staying with friends at the Château de Saché. The novel contains a minimal plot, focusing mostly on the metaphysical ideas of its boy-genius protagonist and his only friend (eventually revealed to be Balzac himself). Although it is not a significant example of the realist style for which Balzac became famous, the novel provides insight into the author's own childhood. Specific details and events from the author's life – including punishment from teachers and social ostracism – suggest a fictionalized autobiography. Critics panned the novel, but Balzac believed that it provided an important look at philosophy, especially metaphysics. As he developed the scheme for La Comédie humaine, he placed Louis Lambert in the Études philosophiques section, and later returned to the same themes in his novel Séraphîta, about an androgynous angelic creature. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured picture Credit: Muhammad Mahdi Karim The glass house at Lal Bagh, a botanical garden in Bangalore, India. The garden was commissioned by the ruler of Mysore, Hyder Ali in 1760, and completed during the reign of his son Tipu Sultan. The glass house was modeled on London's Crystal Palace and constructed at the end of the 19th century. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Did you know... ... that The Fairman Rogers Four-in-Hand (pictured) was the first painting to demonstrate, based on systematic photographic analysis, how horses move? ... that Cheyenne artist Bently Spang satirized anthropologists' depictions of Native Americans as a "lost culture" with a museum exhibit showcasing ordinary objects? ... that Bagyi Aung Soe, now recognized as one of Burma's most important modern artists, lived in poverty and was considered by some to be mad? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   In this month 9 April 2000 – Jackie Evancho is born. At the age of 10, she becomes the youngest singer in history with a platinum album, O Holy Night. 10 April 1900 – Scottish soprano Mary Garden makes her professional debut singing the title role in Gustave Charpentier's Louise at the Opéra-Comique in Paris 11 April 1869 – Norwegian sculptor Gustav Vigeland, designer of the Nobel Peace Prize medal, is born near Halse og Harkmark 12 April 1937 – Abdülhak Hâmid Tarhan, an early 20th-century Turkish playwright and poet who was one of the leading lights of the Turkish Romantic period dies in Istanbul 23 April 1616 – William Shakespeare (pictured), often considered the greatest English playwright, dies in Stratford-upon-Avon at the age of 52 29 April 1968 – Hair, which defined the genre of the "rock musical", has its Broadway premiere at the Biltmore Theatre More anniversaries... edit   News April 5: Wikinews visits set of indie film 'Dead on Set' April 3: Pop-artist James Rosenquist dies aged 83 March 27: Fans unite at Toronto Comicon, meet Degrassi stars March 1: Politically concerned movie Zootopia wins Academy Award for Best Animated Feature Film February 15: Adele and David Bowie each win five Grammys Arts on Wikinews edit   Featured biography André Kertész (1894–1985) was a Hungarian-born photographer distinguished by his photographic composition and by his early efforts in developing the photo essay. In the early years of his lengthy career, his then-unorthodox camera angles, and his unwillingness to compromise his personal photographic style, prevented his work from gaining wider recognition. Even towards the end of his life, Kertész did not feel he had gained worldwide recognition. The first photographer to have an exposition devoted to his work, he is recognized as one of the seminal figures of photojournalism, if not photography as a whole. Dedicated by his family to work as a stock broker, Kertész was an autodidact and his early work was mostly published in magazines. The imminent threat of WWII pushed him to immigrate to the United States, where he had a more difficult life and needed to rebuild his reputation through commissioned work. He would take offense with several editors that he felt did not recognize his work. In the 1940s and '50s he stopped working for magazines and began to achieve greater international success. Despite the numerous awards he collected over the years, he still felt unrecognized, a sentiment which did not change even at the time of his death. His career is generally divided into four periods – the Hungarian period, the French period, the American period and, towards the end of his life, the International period. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured audio 1788 – Auld Lang Syne Frank C. Stanley's 1910 performance of Robert Burns' Auld Lang Syne. Contains the first and last verse. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories ? Arts ? Arts portal ? Arts by culture ? Arts by place ? Arts-related lists ? Aesthetics ? Arts genres by country or nationality ? Arts awards ? Censorship in the arts ? Crafts ? Creative works ? Arts districts ? Arts events ? Literature ? Arts occupations ? Arts organizations ? Arts portals ? Performing arts ? Religion and the arts ? Arts venues ? Visual arts ? Women and the arts ? Works about the arts ? Wikipedia books on arts ? Art stubs edit   WikiProjects Parent project Arts Descendant projects Aesthetics Architecture Books Novels Collections care Dance Films Horror Literature Magic Music Albums Classical music Composers Guitar Musicians Music Venues Opera Gilbert and Sullivan Richard Wagner Poetry Television Theatre Elizabethan theatre Musical theatre Visual arts Animation Anime and manga Contemporary art Comics Graffiti Graphic design Fashion Photography Public art What are WikiProjects? edit   Selected quote “ It [the movie art form] combines so many other art forms, as do theater and opera, but the essence of cinema is editing. It's the combination of what can be extraordinary images, images of people during emotional moments, or just images in a general sense, but put together in a kind of alchemy. A number of images put together a certain way become something quite above and beyond what any of them are individually. ” — Francis Ford Coppola ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Related portals Architecture Culture Dance Film Literature Music Philosophy Poetry Television Theatre Video games Visual arts Writing edit   Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Requests articles (arts and entertainment) Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Arts Expand: check Art stubs to expand Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Arts topics, requested pictures edit   Associated Wikimedia Arts on Wikibooks  Arts on Wikimedia Commons Arts on Wikinews  Arts on Wikiquote  Arts on Wikisource  Arts on Wikiversity  Arts on Wiktionary  Manuals and books Images and media News Quotations Texts Learning resources Definitions What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Arts&oldid=649230671" Categories: Arts portal Arts Visual arts Performing arts Arts portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Català ?eština Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español ????? Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kapampangan ??????? Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Malagasy ?????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? Nederlands ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ???? ????? ?????? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? ????? ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Svenska Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ?????? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? West-Vlams ?? Xitsonga ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 28 February 2015, at 14:19. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography |||Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology edit   The Biography Portal Cultural icon A biography is a detailed description or account of someone's life. More than a list of basic facts (education, work, relationships, and death), a biography also portrays a subject's experience of these events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of his or her life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of a subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Biographical works in diverse media—from literature to film—form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and, at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is about a life of a subject, written by that subject or sometimes with a collaborator. More about biographies… View new selections below (purge) edit   Featured biography Ahmose I (sometimes written Amosis I and meaning The Moon is Born) was a pharaoh of ancient Egypt and the founder of the Eighteenth dynasty. He was a member of the Theban royal house, the son of pharaoh Tao II Seqenenre and brother of the last pharaoh of the Seventeenth dynasty, King Kamose. Sometime during the reign of his father or grandfather, Thebes rebelled against the Hyksos, the rulers of Lower Egypt. When he was seven his father was killed, and when he was about ten his brother died of unknown causes, after reigning only three years. Ahmose I assumed the throne after the death of his brother, and upon coronation became known as Neb-Pehty-Re (The Lord of Strength is Re). During his reign he completed the conquest and expulsion of the Hyksos from the delta region, restored Theban rule over the whole of Egypt and successfully reasserted Egyptian power in its formerly subject territories of Nubia and Canaan. He then reorganized the administration of the country, reopened quarries, mines and trade routes and began massive construction projects of a type that had not been undertaken since the time of the Middle Kingdom. This building program culminated in the construction of the last pyramid built by native Egyptian rulers. Ahmose's reign laid the foundations for the New Kingdom, under which Egyptian power reached its peak. His reign is usually dated to about 1550–1525 BC. (Read more...) Archive – More "Featured biographies"... edit   Selected portrait Credit: Bain News Service, restored by jjron Lillian Diana Gish (October 14, 1893 – February 27, 1993) was an American stage, screen, and television actress, director and writer whose film acting career spanned 75 years, from 1912 to 1987. She was a prominent film star of the 1910s and 1920s, particularly associated with the films of director D. W. Griffith, including her leading role in Griffith's seminal Birth of a Nation. More selected pictures... Read more... edit   Things you can do Write an article Expand an article about: a person an actor an animator an artist a businessperson a diplomat an educator an engineer a jurist a military person a musician a politician a scientist a sportsperson a writer a photographer Improve an article by: adding references Review an article John Gilchrist (linguist) • Thomas Brattle • Answer requests for comments Assess an article Assessment requests Unassessed articles edit   Categories Biography • People By association • By behavior • By ethnicity • By gender • By language • By nationality By occupation: Academics • Scientists Actors • Artists • Choreographers • Comedians • Dancers • Directors • Musicians • Photographers • Playwrights • Writers Astronauts • Aviators • Explorers • Mountain climbers Businesspeople • Computer designers • Innovators Heads of state • Humanitarians • Journalists • Lawyers • Politicians • Warriors Sportspeople • Association football players • Baseball players • Basketball players • Olympians By place • By political orientation • By religion By status: Award winners • Billionaires • Celebrities By time • Lists of people ? Biography (genre) ? Biography awards ? Biographers ? Family history ? Biography journals ? Biographical museums ? Oral history ? Person databases ? The Biography Channel shows ? Biographical works edit   On this day – April 26 Births 121 - Marcus Aurelius, Roman Emperor (d. 180) 1711 - David Hume, Scottish philosopher and historian (d. 1776) (pictured) 1785 - John James Audubon, French-American naturalist and illustrator (d. 1851) 1917 - I.M. Pei, Chinese-born architect 1933 - Carol Burnett, American comedian Deaths 1865 - John Wilkes Booth, American actor and assassin (shot) (b. 1838) 1970 - Gypsy Rose Lee, American actress (b. 1911) 1989 - Lucille Ball, American actress and comedian (b. 1911) More of today's anniversaries... edit   Did you know ... that Madmen in the Yard, a drawing by the Croatian painter Ignjat Job (pictured), was influenced by his two-year stay in a mental hospital? ... that USMC Lieutenant General Henry Louis Larsen was Governor of American Samoa and Governor of Guam after his father-in-law and brother-in-law were each Governor of Colorado? ... that detailed drawings by French explorer Louis Delaporte guided the reconstruction of Pha That Luang, a major Buddhist temple in Laos? ... that although Norma Lyon studied animal science at Iowa State University, she ended up sculpting butter at state fairs? ... that Tom Paton, a member of the Montreal hockey club, was the first goaltender to win the Stanley Cup in 1893? ... that after the Ottoman general Turahano?lu Ömer Bey wiped out one of Dracula's armies in 1462, he deposited 2,000 severed heads at the feet of Sultan Mehmed II? ... that the hasty marriage of Thomas Thynne of Longleat may have helped to inspire Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet? Read more... edit   Quote of the week "There is no Death! What seems so is transition; This life of mortal breath Is but a suburb of the life elysian, Whose portal we call Death." — Henry Wadsworth Longfellow In Resignation, 1849 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit   WikiProjects List of WikiProjects and work groups that involve biography articles: Arts and entertainment Actors and Filmmakers Composers Canadian Dictionary of Biography Initiative Living persons Philosophers Saints Romance authors Military Peers and Baronets Politics and government U.S. Members of Congress U.S. presidents Royalty and nobility Science and academia Aerospace Sports and games Baseball players List of all WikiProjects See also: Biographies of living persons • Manual of Style (biographies) edit   Related portals Anthropology Community Criminal justice Culture Death Gangs Human rights LGBT Mind and brain Music Philosophy Religion Sexuality Social and political philosophy Thinking edit   Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Wikispecies  Species Wikipedia's Portals All Portals Overview Glossaries Indices Lists Outlines Categories Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Featured portals About portals Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=771163531" Categories: Depreciated Portal:Biography pages Biography portal Biography portals Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ?????? ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 19 March 2017, at 22:49. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Geography |||Portal:Geography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Sociology portals: Arts · Anthropology · Community · Culture · Economics · Education · Geography · Gender studies · Globalization · History · Human rights · Internet · Law · Philosophy · Social movements · Social sciences · Social welfare and social work · Society Places near you edit   The Geography Portal Transportation geography Geography is the science that studies the lands, the features, the inhabitants, and the phenomena of the Earth. A literal translation would be "to describe or write about the Earth". The first person to use the word "geography" was Eratosthenes (276–194 BC). Four historical traditions in geographical research are the spatial analysis of the natural and the human phenomena (geography as the study of distribution), the area studies (places and regions), the study of the human-land relationship, and research in the Earth sciences. Modern geography is an all-encompassing discipline that foremost seeks to understand the Earth and all of its human and natural complexities—not merely where objects are, but how they have changed and come to be. Geography has been called "the world discipline" and "the bridge between the human and the physical science". Geography is divided into two main branches: human geography and physical geography. More about geography… View new selections below (purge) edit   Featured article Karnataka is a state in South West India. It was created on 1 November 1956 with the passage of the States Reorganisation Act, and this day is annually celebrated as Karnataka Rajyotsava (Formation Day). Originally known as the State of Mysore, it was renamed Karnataka in 1973. It is the land of the Kannadiga, Tuluva, Konkani, and Kodava peoples. With over 61 million inhabitants as of 2011, Karnataka is the ninth largest state by population in India. Kannada is the most widely spoken and official language of the state. The two main river systems of the state are Krishna and its tributaries (Bhima, Ghataprabha, Vedavati, Malaprabha, and Tungabhadra) in the north, and the Cauvery and its tributaries (Hemavati, Shimsha, Arkavathi, Lakshmana Thirtha and Kabini) in the south. Both these rivers flow eastward and fall into the Bay of Bengal. With an antiquity that dates to the paleolithic, Karnataka has also been home to some of the most powerful empires of ancient and medieval India. The philosophers and musical bards patronised by these empires launched socio-religious and literary movements which have endured to the present day. Karnataka has contributed significantly to both the Carnatic and Hindustani forms of Indian classical music. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   In this month 7 April 1985 – Premiere of National Geographic Explorer on Nickelodeon 10 April 1982 – Arrival of Ranulph Fiennes and Charles R. Burton at North Pole 13 April 2005 – Launch of Genographic Project by National Geographic Society and IBM 27 April 1521 – Death of Ferdinand Magellan (pictured), Portuguese explorer who led part of the first expedition around the world More anniversaries... edit   Did you know... ...that the megalithic Niedertiefenbach tomb in Hesse (pictured), Germany has at least ten discernible layers of burials from the New Stone Age? ... that Broad Avenue in Memphis, Tennessee, went from vacant storefronts to a vibrant arts district in less than a decade? ... that forest degradation and illegal exports threaten the survival of the Rainforest Chameleon? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Things you can do Here are some tasks awaiting attention: Article requests?: See Requested articles/Social sciences/Geography, cities, regions and named places and Missing articles about Locations Assess?: Tag related article talk pages with {{WikiProject Geography}}. To help assess the quality and importance of geography articles, please see: Unassessed geography articles and Unknown-importance geography articles. Cleanup?: See Geography articles needing attention Geography Geographic information system Geography of China Geostatistics History of geography Holarctic Kriging Philosophy of geography Urbanism Valley Copyedit?: Geographical feature Glossary of geography terms List of world map changes Regions of North America (See Regions of Africa) Regions of Oceania Regions of South America Demographics of Asia (See Demographics of Africa) Demographics of Oceania Cycle of erosion Outer Continental Shelf Tied island Deletion sorting?: Listed at Geographic related deletion discussions Expand?: TOP PRIORITY: expand articles in Outline of geography and Outlines of regions (one for each country and region) - these are general reference companions to the main articles on each country. Are your favorite countries covered yet? The lists completed enough to be transferred to article space can be found at Portal:Contents/Geography and places. Index of geography articles (replace redirect with an article index, see Index of psychology articles as an example) List of geographers Visual geography Geographical coordinates?: See Articles missing geocoordinate data by country Infobox?: See Geography articles needing infoboxes Map?: See Wikipedia requested maps Notability?: See Geography articles with topics of unclear notability Photo?: See Wikipedia requested photographs of places Stubs?: See Geography stubs edit   Featured biography Mary Anning was a British fossil collector, dealer and palaeontologist who became known around the world for important finds she made in the Jurassic marine fossil beds at Lyme Regis where she lived. Her work contributed to fundamental changes in scientific thinking about prehistoric life and the history of the earth. Her discoveries included the first ichthyosaur skeleton to be correctly identified, found when she was just twelve years old; the first two plesiosaur skeletons ever found; the first pterosaur skeleton located outside Germany; and important fish fossils. Her observations were critical to the discovery that coprolites were fossilised faeces. Geologist Henry De la Beche's Duria Antiquior, the first widely circulated pictorial representation of a scene from prehistoric life derived from fossil reconstructions, was based largely on fossils Anning had found. Her gender and social class prevented her from fully participating in the scientific community of 19th-century Britain, prevented her from joining the Geological Society of London, and prevented her from getting full credit for her work during her lifetime. After her death her unusual life story attracted increasing interest. In 2010 the Royal Society included Anning in a list of the ten British women who have most influenced the history of science. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories ? Geography ? Geography by place ? Geography-related lists ? Geography awards and competitions ? Branches of geography ? Geographic classifications ? Geography conferences ? Geography education ? Environmental studies ? Exploration ? Geocodes ? Geographers ? Geographic data and information ? Geographical zones ? History of geography ? Land systems ? Landscape ? Lists of countries by geography ? Navigation ? Geography organizations ? Places ? Geographical regions ? Surveying ? Geographical technology ? Geography terminology ? Town squares ? Works about geography ? Geographic images ? Geography stubs edit   WikiProjects Parent project WikiProject Geography Descendant projects Caves Cities Countries Country subdivisions Demographics Deserts Former countries Geographical coordinates Glaciers Islands Lakes Maps Mountains Protected areas Rivers Subdivisions of former countries Tropical cyclones Urban studies and planning Volcanoes Waterfalls Related projects WikiProject Globalization What are WikiProjects? edit   Featured picture Credit: Ikiwaner Dead Acacia erioloba trees in Deadvlei, a white claypan inside Namib-Naukluft Park in the Namib Desert of Namibia. Deadvlei is surrounded by the highest sand dunes in the world, averaging 350 metres (1,150 ft) high. About 900 years ago, drought caused the dunes to block the Tsauchab river, which in turn killed the trees. However, because the desert is so dry, they do not decompose. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Selected quote “ Roll on, thou deep and dark blue Ocean—roll! / Ten thousand fleets sweep over thee in vain; / Man marks the earth with ruin—his control / Stops with the shore. ” — Lord Byron, Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, Canto IV (1818) ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Articles Antarctica Afro-Eurasia Americas Australia Africa Eurasia North America Oceania Europe Asia South America Supercontinents: Gondwana • Laurasia • Pangaea • Rodinia edit   Subportals Africa Antarctica Arctic Asia Caribbean Central America Europe European Union Islands Latin America Mediterranean Middle East North America Oceania Oceans South America edit   Related portals Atlas Atmosphere Atmospheric sciences Disasters Earth sciences Earthquakes Energy Environment Global warming Islands Mountains Physics Political science Science Seamounts Sociology Sustainable development Tropical cyclones Volcanoes Water Weather edit   Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Wikispecies  Species What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Geography&oldid=709404983" Categories: Geography Geography portals Geography portal Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Bosanski Català Cebuano ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Dansk Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk Gagauz ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? ????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? N?huatl Nederlands ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ???? ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? Scots Seeltersk Shqip ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ????? Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Vèneto Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 10 March 2016, at 18:53. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:History |||Portal:History From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology  History Ancient Egypt Ancient Germanic Culture Ancient Greece Ancient Japan Ancient Near East Ancient Rome Anglo-Saxon England Archaeology Austria-Hungary  British Empire Bulgarian Empire Byzantine Empire Classical civilisation Colonialism Crusades Dacia Disasters German Empire Heraldry History of Canada  History of science Imperial China Indian independence movement Khitan Latter Day Saint movement Middle Ages Mughal Empire New France Ottoman Empire Russian Empire Sasanian Empire Seljuk Empire Soviet Union  War edit   The History Portal This is the Place Monument History is the discovery, collection, organization, analysis, and presentation of information about past events. History can also mean a continuous, typically chronological record of important or public events or of a particular trend or institution. Scholars who write about history are called historians. It is a field of knowledge which uses a narrative to examine and analyse the sequence of events, and it sometimes attempts to objectively investigate the patterns of cause and effect that determine events. Historians debate the nature of history and its usefulness. This includes discussing the study of the discipline as an end in itself and as a way of providing "perspective" on the problems of the present. The stories common to a particular culture but not supported by external sources (such as the legends surrounding King Arthur) are usually classified as cultural heritage rather than as the "disinterested investigation" needed by the discipline of history. Events of the past prior to written record are considered prehistory. Amongst scholars, fifth century BC Greek historian Herodotus is considered to be the "father of history"; the methods of Herodotus along with his contemporary Thucydides form the foundations for the modern study of history. Their influence (along with other historical traditions in other parts of their world) has spawned many different interpretations of the nature of history which has developed over the centuries and are continuing to change. The modern study of history has many different fields, including those that focus on certain regions and those that focus on certain topical or thematic elements of historical investigation. Often, history is taught as part of primary and secondary education, and the academic study of history is a major discipline in university studies. More about History… View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article The formal unification of Germany into a politically and administratively integrated nation state officially occurred on 18 January 1871 at the Versailles Palace's Hall of Mirrors in France. Princes of the German states gathered there to proclaim Wilhelm of Prussia as Emperor Wilhelm of the German Empire after the French capitulation in the Franco-Prussian War. Unofficially, the transition of most of the German-speaking populations into a federated organization of states occurred over nearly a century of experimentation. Unification exposed several glaring religious, linguistic, social, and cultural differences between and among the inhabitants of the new nation, suggesting that 1871 only represents one moment in a continuum of the larger unification processes. The model of diplomatic spheres of influence resulting from the Congress of Vienna in 1814–15 after the Napoleonic Wars endorsed Austrian dominance in Central Europe. However, the negotiators at Vienna took no account of Prussia's growing strength within and among the German states, failing to foresee that Prussia would challenge Austria for leadership within the German states. This German dualism presented two solutions to the problem of unification: Kleindeutsche Lösung, the small Germany solution (Germany without Austria), or Großdeutsche Lösung, greater Germany solution (Germany with Austria). Reaction to Danish and French nationalism provided foci for expressions of German unity. Military successes—especially Prussian ones—in three regional wars generated enthusiasm and pride that politicians could harness to promote unification. This experience echoed the memory of mutual accomplishment in the Napoleonic Wars, particularly in the War of Liberation of 1813–14. By establishing a Germany without Austria, the political and administrative unification in 1871 at least temporarily solved the problem of dualism. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Selected biography Pericles (Greek: ????????, Perikl?s, "surrounded by glory"; c. 495 – 429 BC) was a prominent and influential statesman, orator, and general of Athens during the city's Golden Age—specifically, the time between the Persian and Peloponnesian wars. He was descended, through his mother, from the powerful and historically influential Alcmaeonid family. Pericles had such a profound influence on Athenian society that Thucydides, his contemporary historian, acclaimed him as "the first citizen of Athens". Pericles turned the Delian League into an Athenian empire and led his countrymen during the first two years of the Peloponnesian War. The period during which he led Athens, roughly from 461 to 429 BC, is sometimes known as the "Age of Pericles", though the period thus denoted can include times as early as the Persian Wars, or as late as the next century. Pericles promoted the arts and literature; this was a chief reason Athens holds the reputation of being the educational and cultural centre of the ancient Greek world. He started an ambitious project that generated most of the surviving structures on the Acropolis (including the Parthenon). This project beautified the city, exhibited its glory, and gave work to the people. Furthermore, Pericles fostered Athenian democracy to such an extent that critics call him a populist. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Did you know... ... that on 26 April 1881 HMS Doterel (pictured) exploded, killing 143 of the 155 crew members? ... that causes of the deaths at the Berlin Wall included shooting, drowning, suffocation, suicide, and falling from a balloon? ... that the 19th-century swindler Bertha Heyman, known as "The Confidence Queen," conned men by pretending to be a wealthy woman who was unable to access her fortune? ... that only four great uncial codices have survived until the present day? ... that after World War II, Polish resistance organizer and Warsaw Uprising fighter Jan Mazurkiewicz was brutally tortured by the authorities in communist Poland? ... that tiny Paederus beetles may have caused some of the ten Plagues of Egypt? ... that the only known report of bloodshed during the simulated Nazi invasion of Winnipeg was from a woman who cut her thumb while preparing toast? ... that Dacian bracelets were used as currency and votive offerings? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Selected picture The Trinity nuclear test was the first nuclear detonation in the world. Conducted by the United States Army on July 16, 1945, the successful test would set the stage for the coming Atomic Age. This image, captured by Berlyn Brixner, shows the fireball that developed 0.016 seconds after ignition; the explosive had a yield of 20 kilotons of dynamite. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   On this day April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries edit   Selected quote Victorious warriors win first and then go to war, while defeated warriors go to war first and then seek to win. —?Sun Tzu, Ancient Chinese military strategist ...Archive More... edit   Selected portal Classical civilisation "The ideas which now pass for brilliant innovations and advances are in fact mere revivals of ancient errors, and a further proof of the dictum that those who are ignorant of the past are condemned to repeat it." — Henry Hazlitt ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Things you can do    Here are some Open Tasks : Copy/edit: Hongwu Emperor, Indian independence movement, Modern history, More... Wikify: Merge: More... Requests: , More... Stubs: Panhellenic Liberation Movement, More... Requested pictures - of history topics Are you a historian, i.e. one who studies and writes history, and who has a keen interest in writing outstanding articles? Join our fine group by adding Category:Wikipedian historians to the bottom of your user page. edit   WikiProjects History Ancient Near East • Australian History • Classical Greece and Rome • Dacia • Former countries • History of Canada • Chinese history • European history • Heraldry and vexillology • Indian history • Jewish history • Medieval Scotland • Mesoamerica • Military history • Middle Ages • History of Science Time Days of the Year • Years Biography Composers • Political figures • Saints • United States Presidents   Topics v t e Social sciences Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural linguistics social Economics microeconomics macroeconomics Geography human integrative History cultural economic political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems Political science international relations psephology public administration public policy Psychology abnormal biological cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental (social science studies) Food studies Gender studies Global studies History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Media studies Philosophy of science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Social work Other categorizations Humanities Geisteswissenschaft Human science Index Journals Outline Wikiversity v t e Humanities Anthropology Digital Humanities History Law Literature Performing arts Politics Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts v t e Time Key concepts Human Life Nature Past history deep time Present Future Futures studies Far future in religion Far future in science fiction and popular culture Timeline of the far future Eternity Eternity of the world Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC UT TAI Unit of time Planck time Second Minute Hour Day Week Month Year Decade Century Millennium Tropical year Sidereal year Measurement systems Time zone 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Daylight saving time Solar time Sidereal time Metric time Decimal time Hexadecimal time Calendars Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Lunar Solar Hijri Mayan Intercalation Leap second Leap year Clocks Horology History of timekeeping devices Main types astrarium atomic quantum marine sundial sundial markup schema watch water-based Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Chronicle Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Religion Mythology Dreamtime K?la Kalachakra Prophecy Time and fate deities Wheel of time Immortality Philosophy of time A-series and B-series B-theory of time Causality Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Human experience and use of time Accounting period Chronemics Fiscal year Generation time Mental chronometry Music Procrastination Punctuality Temporal database Term Time discipline Time management Time perception Specious present Time-tracking software Time-use research Time-based currency (time banking) Time value of money Time clock Timesheet Yesterday Time in Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute time and space Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Imaginary time Planck epoch Planck time Proper time Rate Spacetime Theory of relativity Time dilation gravitational Time domain T-symmetry other subject areas Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Dating methodologies in archaeology Time geography Related topics Carpe diem Clock position Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time complexity Time signature Time travel Time portal v t e Chronology Key topics Archaeology Astronomy Geology History Human Life Nature Paleontology Time Eras Epochs Calendar eras Human Era Ab urbe condita Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Mundi Byzantine era Seleucid era Spanish era Before Present Hijri Egyptian Sothic cycle Hindu units of time (Yuga) Mesoamerican Long Count Short Count Tzolk'in Haab' Regnal year Canon of Kings Lists of kings Limmu Era names Chinese Japanese Korean Vietnamese Calendars Pre-Julian / Julian Pre-Julian Roman Original Julian Proleptic Julian Revised Julian Gregorian Gregorian Proleptic Gregorian Old Style and New Style dates Adoption of the Gregorian calendar Dual dating Astronomical Lunisolar Solar Lunar Astronomical year numbering Others Chinese sexagenary cycle Geologic Calendar Hebrew Iranian Islamic ISO week date Mesoamerican Maya Aztec Winter count (Plains Indians) Astronomic time Cosmic Calendar Ephemeris Galactic year Metonic cycle Milankovitch cycles Geologic time Concepts Deep time Geological history of Earth Geological time units Standards Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA) Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) Methods Chronostratigraphy Geochronology Isotope geochemistry Law of superposition Luminescence dating Samarium-neodymium dating Chronological dating Absolute dating Amino acid racemisation Archaeomagnetic dating Dendrochronology Ice core Incremental dating Lichenometry Paleomagnetism Radiometric dating Radiocarbon Uranium–lead Potassium-argon Tephrochronology Luminescence dating Relative dating Fluorine absorption Nitrogen dating Obsidian hydration Seriation Stratigraphy Genetic methods Molecular clock Linguistic methods Glottochronology Related topics Chronicle New Chronology Periodization Synchronoptic view Timeline Year Zero Circa Floruit Terminus post quem ASPRO chronology Portal edit   Categories History • By period • By region • By topic • By ethnic group • Historiography • Archaeology • Books • Documents • Maps • Images • Magazines • Organizations • Fictional • Museums • Pseudohistory • Stubs • Timelines • Chronology • People • Wikipedia historians ? History ? History by ethnic group ? History by location ? History by period ? History by topic ? Fields of history ? Historians ? History-related lists ? History awards ? Bible history ? Chronology ? Historical controversies ? Economic, social and political strategies ? History education ? Historical eras ? Events ? Historically themed events ? Historical geography ? Historicity ? Historiography ? Legacies ? Media history ? Historical objects ? Oral history ? History organizations ? Phaleristics ? Philosophy of history ? Historic preservation ? Pseudohistory ? Sacred history ? Theories of history ? Historical timelines ? Works about history ? World history ? Wikipedia books on history ? History images ? History stubs   Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Wikispecies  Species What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:History&oldid=749756545" Categories: History portal History portals History Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikisource Wikiversity Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ??????? ?????? ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Euskara ????? Français Frysk Gagauz Galego G?k?y? ??? ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? ?????? ????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? Nederlands ??? Napulitano ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ?????? ???? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? West-Vlams Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 16 November 2016, at 00:57. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Mathematics |||Portal:Mathematics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology edit   The Mathematics Portal Square root Mathematics is the study of numbers, quantity, space, structure, and change. Mathematics is used throughout the world as an essential tool in many fields, including natural science, engineering, medicine, and the social sciences. Applied mathematics, the branch of mathematics concerned with application of mathematical knowledge to other fields, inspires and makes use of new mathematical discoveries and sometimes leads to the development of entirely new mathematical disciplines, such as statistics and game theory. Mathematicians also engage in pure mathematics, or mathematics for its own sake, without having any application in mind. There is no clear line separating pure and applied mathematics, and practical applications for what began as pure mathematics are often discovered. More about Mathematics... Selected article | Selected picture | Did you know... | Topics in mathematics Categories | WikiProjects | Things you can do | Index | Related portals There are approximately 31,444 mathematics articles in Wikipedia. View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article Carl Friedrich Gauss Image credit: C.A. Jensen (1792-1870) Carl Friedrich Gauss (30 April 1777 – 23 February 1855) was a German mathematician and scientist of profound genius who contributed significantly to many fields, including number theory, analysis, differential geometry, geodesy, electricity, magnetism, astronomy and optics. Known as "the prince of mathematicians" and "greatest mathematician since antiquity", Gauss had a remarkable influence in many fields of mathematics and science and is ranked as one of history's most influential mathematicians. Gauss was a child prodigy, of whom there are many anecdotes pertaining to his astounding precocity while a mere toddler, and made his first ground-breaking mathematical discoveries while still a teenager. He completed Disquisitiones Arithmeticae, his magnum opus, at the age of twenty-one (1798), though it wasn't published until 1801. This work was fundamental in consolidating number theory as a discipline and has shaped the field to the present day. View all selected articles Read More... edit   Selected picture Credit: BenFrantzDale A Lorenz curve shows the distribution of income in a population by plotting the percentage y of total income that is earned by the bottom x percent of households (or individuals). Developed by economist Max O. Lorenz in 1905 to describe income inequality, the curve is typically plotted with a diagonal line (reflecting a hypothetical "equal" distribution of incomes) for comparison. This leads naturally to a derived quantity called the Gini coefficient, first published in 1912 by Corrado Gini, which is the ratio of the area between the diagonal line and the curve (area A in this graph) to the area under the diagonal line (the sum of A and B); higher Gini coefficients reflect more income inequality. Lorenz's curve is a special kind of cumulative distribution function used to characterize quantities that follow a Pareto distribution, a type of power law. More specifically, it can be used to illustrate the Pareto principle, a rule of thumb stating that roughly 80% of the identified "effects" in a given phenomenon under study will come from 20% of the "causes" (in the first decade of the 20th century Vilfredo Pareto showed that 80% of the land in Italy was owned by 20% of the population). As this so-called "80–20 rule" implies a specific level of inequality (i.e., a specific power law), more or less extreme cases are possible. For example, in the United States in the first half of the 2010s, 95% of the financial wealth was held by the top 20% of wealthiest households (in 2010), the top 1% of individuals held approximately 40% of the wealth (2012), and the top 1% of income earners received approximately 20% of the pre-tax income (2013). Observations such as these have brought income and wealth inequality into popular consciousness and have given rise to various slogans about "the 1%" versus "the 99%". More selected pictures... Read more... edit   Did you know... ... that economists blame market failures on non-convexity? ... that, according to the pizza theorem, a circular pizza that is sliced off-center into eight equal-angled wedges can still be divided equally between two people? ... that the clique problem of programming a computer to find complete subgraphs in an undirected graph was first studied as a way to find groups of people who all know each other in social networks? ... that the Herschel graph is the smallest possible polyhedral graph that does not have a Hamiltonian cycle? ... that the Life without Death cellular automaton, a mathematical model of pattern formation, is a variant of Conway's Game of Life in which cells, once brought to life, never die? ... that one can list every positive rational number without repetition by breadth-first traversal of the Calkin–Wilf tree? ... that the Hadwiger conjecture implies that the external surface of any three-dimensional convex body can be illuminated by only eight light sources, but the best proven bound is that 16 lights are sufficient?                           Showing 7 items out of 72 More did you know edit   WikiProjects The Mathematics WikiProject is the center for mathematics-related editing on Wikipedia. Join the discussion on the project's talk page. Project pages Participants Current activity Manual of style Conventions Essays Advice on using Wikipedia for mathematics self-study Proofs Subprojects PlanetMath Exchange (Talk) Graphics (Talk) Article assessment (Talk) Related projects Computer science | Cryptography | Game theory | Numbers | Physics | Science | Statistics edit   Things you can do Create a new article: See requested articles list Add a new image: Requested images list Improve articles: Pages needing attention (Category) Expand articles: Mathematics stubs edit   Categories Algebra | Arithmetic | Analysis | Complex analysis | Applied mathematics | Calculus | Category theory | Chaos theory | Combinatorics | Dynamic systems | Fractals | Game theory | Geometry | Algebraic geometry | Graph theory | Group theory | Linear algebra | Mathematical logic | Model theory | Multi-dimensional geometry | Number theory | Numerical analysis | Optimization | Order theory | Probability and statistics | Set theory | Statistics | Topology | Algebraic topology | Trigonometry | Linear programming Mathematics (books) | History of mathematics | Mathematicians | Awards | Education | Literature | Notation | Organizations | Theorems | Proofs | Unsolved problems ? Mathematics ? Fields of mathematics ? Mathematics-related lists ? Mathematicians ? Mathematical concepts ? Mathematics and culture ? Mathematical examples ? History of mathematics ? Mathematics and art ? Mathematical modeling ? Mathematical notation ? Mathematical science occupations ? Philosophy of mathematics ? Mathematical projects ? Mathematical proofs ? Pseudomathematics ? Set indices on mathematics ? Mathematical terminology ? Mathematics textbooks ? Mathematical theorems ? Mathematical tools ? Women in mathematics ? Wikipedia books on mathematics ? Mathematics stubs More mathematics categories edit   Topics in mathematics General Foundations Number theory Discrete mathematics Mathematicians History of mathematics Philosophy of mathematics Mathematical notation Mathematical beauty Mathematics education Areas of mathematics List of basic mathematics topics List of mathematical symbols Wikipedia Books: Mathematics Foundations of mathematics Mathematical logic Proof theory Gödel's incompleteness theorems Model theory Recursion theory Set theory (portal) Naive set theory Axiomatic set theory Category theory (portal) Topos theory Number theory (portal) Algebraic number theory Analytic number theory Arithmetic Fundamental theorem of arithmetic Numbers Natural numbers Prime numbers Rational numbers Algebraic numbers Discrete mathematics (portal) Combinatorics Combinatorial geometry Coding theory Combinatorial design Enumerative combinatorics Combinatorial optimization Graph theory Order theory Lattice theory Algebra Analysis Geometry and topology Applied mathematics Algebra (portal) Elementary algebra Abstract algebra Group theory Ring theory Field theory Commutative algebra Geometric algebra Linear algebra Matrix theory Multilinear algebra Universal algebra Fundamental theorem of algebra Analysis (portal) Calculus Fundamental theorem of calculus Vector calculus Geometric calculus Measure theory Real analysis Complex analysis Differential equations Ordinary differential equations Partial differential equations Integral equations Approximation theory Special functions Potential theory Harmonic analysis Fourier analysis Functional analysis Operator theory Geometry (portal) Euclidean geometry Trigonometry Analytic geometry Non-Euclidean geometry Affine geometry Projective geometry Convex geometry Discrete geometry Algebraic geometry Differential geometry Riemannian geometry Lie groups Topology (portal) General topology Algebraic topology Geometric topology Differential topology Applied mathematics Mathematical modeling Mathematical physics Dynamical systems Control theory Calculus of variations Optimization Mathematical economics Game theory Mathematical finance Statistics (portal) Probability theory Stochastic processes Numerical analysis Theoretical computer science Computability theory Complexity theory Cryptography (portal) Information theory edit   Index of mathematics articles ARTICLE INDEX: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z (0–9) MATHEMATICIANS: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z edit   Related portals Algebra Analysis Category theory Computer science Cryptography Discrete mathematics Geometry Logic Mathematics Number theory Physics Science Set theory Statistics Topology Science History of science    Philosophy of science    Systems science    Mathematics    Biology    Chemistry    Physics    Earth sciences    Technology    What are portals? List of portals edit   In other Wikimedia projects The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Mathematics&oldid=686628022" Categories: Mathematics portal Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikinews Wikisource Wikiversity Languages ???? ??????? ???? ????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français G?k?y? ??? ??????? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Lietuvi? Lumbaart Magyar ?????????? Malti Bahasa Melayu ?????????? Nederlands ??? O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? Shqip ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Suomi Svenska ????? Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 20 October 2015, at 08:24. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Science |||Portal:Science From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Science History of science    Philosophy of science    Systems science    Mathematics    Biology    Chemistry    Physics    Earth sciences    Technology    Main page   Categories & Main topics   Related portals & WikiProjects   Things you can do edit The Science Portal For a topic outline of science, see Outline of science. Meissner effect Science is the methodical study of nature including testable explanations and predictions. From classical antiquity through the 19th century, science as a type of knowledge was more closely linked to philosophy than it is now and, in fact, in the Western world, the term "natural philosophy" encompassed fields of study that are today associated with science, such as astronomy, medicine, and physics. However, during the Islamic Golden Age foundations for the scientific method were laid by Ibn al-Haytham in his Book of Optics. While the classification of the material world by the ancient Indians and Greeks into air, earth, fire and water was more philosophical, medieval Middle Easterns used practical, experimental observation to classify materials. Today, the ever-evolving term "science" refers to the pursuit of knowledge, not the knowledge itself. It is often synonymous with "natural and physical science" and often restricted to those branches of study relating to the phenomena of the material universe and their laws. Although the term implies exclusion of pure mathematics, many university faculties include Mathematics Departments within their Faculty of Science. The dominant sense in ordinary use has a narrower use for the term "science." It developed as a part of science becoming a distinct enterprise of defining the "laws of nature"; early examples include Kepler's laws, Galileo's laws, and Newton's laws of motion. In this period it became more common to refer to natural philosophy as "natural science." Over the course of the 19th century, the word "science" became increasingly associated with the disciplined study of the natural world, including physics, chemistry, geology and biology. This sometimes left the study of human thought and society in a linguistic limbo, which was resolved by classifying these areas of academic study as social science. For example, psychology evolved from philosophy, and has grown into an area of study. Currently, there are both "hard" (e.g. biological psychology) and "soft" science (e.g. social psychology) fields within the discipline. As a result, and as is consistent with the unfolding of the study of knowledge and development of methods to establish facts, each area of psychology employs a scientific method. Reflecting the evolution of the development of knowledge and established facts and the use of the scientific method, Psychology Departments in universities are found within: Faculty of Arts and Science, Faculty of Arts, and a Faculty of Science. Similarly, several other major areas of disciplined study and knowledge exist today under the general rubric of "science", such as formal science and applied science. More about Science... View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article A space elevator is a hypothetical structure designed to transport material from a planet's surface into space. Many different types of space elevator structures have been proposed. They all share the goal of replacing rocket propulsion with the traversal of a fixed structure via a mechanism not unlike an elevator, hence its name, in order to move material into or beyond orbit. Space elevators have also sometimes been referred to as space bridges, beanstalks, space ladders or space lifts. The most common proposal is a tether (usually a cable or ribbon) that spans from the surface to a point beyond geosynchronous orbit. As the planet rotates, the inertia at the end of the tether counteracts gravity and keeps the tether taut. Vehicles can then climb the tether and escape the planet's gravity without the use of rockets. Such a structure could eventually permit delivery of great quantities of cargo and people to orbit, and at costs only a fraction of those associated with current means. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Selected picture Credit: Earth Sciences and Image Analysis Laboratory, NASA View of the Earth as seen by the Apollo 17 crew traveling toward the moon. This translunar coast photograph extends from the Mediterranean Sea area to the Antarctica south polar ice cap. This is toward the northeast. Earth, also known as Terra, and (mostly in the 19th century) Tellus, is the third-closest planet to the Sun. It is the largest of the solar system's terrestrial planets and the only planetary body that modern science confirms as harboring life. Scientific evidence indicates that the planet formed around 4.57 billion years ago, and shortly thereafter (4.533 billion years ago) acquired its single natural satellite, the Moon. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Selected biography Carl Edward Sagan (November 9, 1934 – December 20, 1996) was an American astronomer, astrobiologist, and highly successful science popularizer. He pioneered exobiology and promoted the Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence (SETI). He is world-famous for writing popular science books and for co-writing and presenting the award-winning 1980 television series Cosmos: A Personal Voyage, which was the most-watched PBS program until Ken Burns' The Civil War in 1990. A book to accompany the program was also published. He also wrote the novel Contact, the basis for the 1997 film of the same name starring Jodie Foster. During his lifetime, Sagan published more than 600 scientific papers and popular articles and was author, co-author, or editor of more than 20 books. In his works, he frequently advocated scientific skepticism, humanism, and the scientific method. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Did you know... ...that the endangered golden lion tamarin (pictured) has a long, but not prehensile, tail? ...that the Witch's hat is the common name of a colourful orange-red toadstool? ...that Grandi's series 1 ? 1 + 1 ? 1 + • • • is divergent and appears to equal 0, yet in some sense "sums" to 1?2 — a paradox once linked to the creation ex nihilo of the universe? ...that Derek Freeman was an anthropologist whose refutation of Margaret Mead's work "ignited controversy of a scale, visibility, and ferocity never before seen in anthropology"? ...that the New Year's Eve snowstorm of 1963/1964 dropped over 17 inches of snow at Huntsville, Alabama, simultaneously setting new snowfall records for any day, week, or month in their history? ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Associated Wikimedia Science portal on Wikinews     Science on Wikiquote     Science subject on Wikibooks     Science portal on Wikisource     Science category on Wikicommons     Science category on Wiktionary     Wikiversity School of Science News Quotations Manuals Texts Images Definitions Learning Wikipedia's Portals All Portals Overview Glossaries Indices Lists Outlines Categories Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Featured portals About portals Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Science&oldid=714543061" Categories: Science portal Science Science portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikinews Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Català Cebuano Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Limburgs ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ????? Oromoo O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ?????? Português Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ??????? Seeltersk Setswana ????? ???? Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ?????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? ?? Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?????? ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 10 April 2016, at 11:29. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Society |||Portal:Society From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Sociology portals: Arts · Anthropology · Community · Culture · Economics · Education · Geography · Gender studies · Globalization · History · Human rights · Internet · Law · Philosophy · Social movements · Social sciences · Social welfare and social work · Society edit   The Society Portal Social network analysis diagram A human society is a group of people related to each other through continued relations, or a large social grouping sharing the same geographical or virtual territory, same interests, subject to the same political authority and dominant cultural expectations. Human societies are characterized by patterns of relationships (social relations) between individuals who share a distinctive culture and institutions. A given society may be described as the sum total of such relationships among its constituent members. In the social sciences, a larger society often evinces stratification and/or dominance patterns in subgroups. In so far as it is collaborative, a society can enable its members to benefit in ways that would not otherwise be possible on an individual basis; both individual and social (common) benefits can thus be distinguished, or in many cases found to overlap. A society can also consist of like-minded people governed by their own norms and values within a dominant, larger society. This is sometimes referred to as a subculture, a term used extensively within criminology: an organized group working together having a common interests, beliefs, or profession. More broadly, a society may be described as an economic, social, or industrial infrastructure, made up of a varied collection of individuals or subgroups. Members of a society may be from different ethnic groups. A society can be a particular ethnic group, such as the Saxons; a nation state, such as Bhutan; or a broader cultural group, such as a Western society. The word society may also refer to an organized voluntary association of people for religious, benevolent, cultural, scientific, political, patriotic, or other purposes. A "society" may also be a group of social organisms such as an ant colony, or any cooperative aggregate such as, for example, in some formulations of artificial intelligence. More about society… View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article The Tamil people are an ethnic group from South Asia with a recorded history going back almost two millennia. The oldest Tamil communities are those of southern India and north-eastern Sri Lanka. Unlike many ethnic groups, the Tamils have at no time been governed by a single political entity; Tamil?akam, the traditional name for the Tamil lands, has always been under the rule of more than one kingdom or state. Despite this, the Tamil cultural identity has always been strong. Historically, this identity has been primarily linguistic, with Tamils being those whose first language was Tamil. In recent times, however, the definition has been broadened to also include emigrants of Tamil descent who maintain Tamil traditions, even when they no longer speak the language. Tamils are ethnically, linguistically and culturally related to the other Dravidian peoples of South Asia. There are an estimated 74 million Tamils around the world. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured picture Credit: Photo: Marcello Casal Jr, Agência Brasil A United Nations vehicle patrols the streets of the Bel-Air neighborhood of Port-au-Prince in the aftermath of the catastrophic 2010 Haiti earthquake. The earthquake occurred at 16:53 local time (21:53 UTC) on Tuesday, 12 January 2010. An estimated three million people were affected by the earthquake, with an estimated 280,000 buildings severely damaged or destroyed. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Did you know... ... that the desert plants pale wolfberry (pictured) and Berlandier's wolfberry were both used by native Americans for medicinal purposes? ... that the Central Committee of the Commission for Organizing the Party of the Working People of Ethiopia included only one woman? ... that in 1992 the leader of the Gambela People's Liberation Movement, Agwa Alemu, was killed by his own troops? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Anniversaries this month 4 April 1930 - Foundation of the American Rocket Society, originally named the American Interplanetary Society 13 April 1564 - Pope Pius IV approved the Society of the Holy Name 19 April 1866 - First anti-cruelty law was passed since the founding of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Brooklyn chapter pictured) 22 April 2008 - IEEE Power Engineering Society changed its name to IEEE Power & Energy Society More anniversaries... edit   Selected biography Dyer Daniel Lum (1839–April 6, 1893) was a 19th-century American anarchist labor activist and poet. A leading anarcho-syndicalist and a prominent left-wing intellectual of the 1880s, he is remembered as the lover and mentor of early anarcha-feminist Voltairine de Cleyre. Lum was a prolific writer who wrote a number of key anarchist texts, and contributed to publications including Mother Earth, Twentieth Century, Liberty (Benjamin Tucker's individualist anarchist journal), The Alarm (the journal of the International Working People's Association) and The Open Court among others. Following the arrest of Albert Parsons, Lum edited The Alarm from 1892–1893. Traditionally portrayed as a "genteel, theoretical anarchist", Lum has recently been recast by the scholarship of Paul Avrich as an "uncompromising rebel thirsty for violence and martyrdom" in the light of his involvement in the Haymarket affair in 1886. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured audio January 28, 2008 – State of the Union Address by President George W. Bush George W. Bush's address, given on the first floor of the House of Representatives at the Capitol. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories Society ? Society portal ? Society by continent ? Society by nationality ? Sociology ? Fictional society ? Anti-social behaviour ? Business ? Civil society ? Clubs and societies ? Communication ? Corporate groups ? Crime ? Culture ? Disability ? Economics ? Education ? Social events ? Family ? Feminism and society ? Society in fiction ? Folklore ? Health ? Social history ? Home ? Humans ? Inequality ? Social institutions ? Social issues ? Society-related lists ? Mating systems ? Matronymics ? Medicine in society ? Military ? Society museums ? Nationality ? Organizations ? Patronymics ? People ? Philosophy and society ? Politics ? Postindustrial society ? Private law ? Race and society ? Religion and society ? Rural society ? Science in society ? Sexuality and society ? Social change ? Social media ? Social responsibility ? Social sciences ? Social work ? Socioeconomics ? Technology in society ? Water and society ? Wikipedia books on society ? Society portals edit   WikiProjects Related projects Community Ethnic groups Family and relationships Former countries Gender Studies LGBT studies Literature Sexology and sexuality Sociology Travel and Tourism What are WikiProjects? edit   Selected quote “ The basic discovery about any people is the discovery of the relationship between its men and its women. ” — Pearl S. Buck ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Recognized content Featured articles 2012 phenomenon W. E. B. Du Bois Female genital mutilation From The Doctor to my son Thomas Fuck (film) Fuck: Word Taboo and Protecting Our First Amendment Liberties Featured lists List of awards and nominations received by Penn & Teller: Bullshit! Good articles Timeline of the Egyptian revolution of 2011 Acting white African Americans in Omaha, Nebraska Agnosticism America's 60 Families Anarchism Anarchism in Cuba Anonymous (group) Anti-nuclear movement in Australia Archaeoastronomy Average Joe Balangoda Man Before the Dawn (book) Birth control Black Lives Matter Boerehaat The Bog People Bomis A Community of Witches Compulsory Miseducation Cult film Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact Culture of the Song dynasty Cutting the Mustard The Daily Stormer Demographics of the Supreme Court of the United States Diaphoneme Double burden Dreamtime (book) Émile Durkheim EST and The Forum in popular culture Ely and Littleport riots of 1816 Family in advertising Family structure in the United States Feminism Feminist economics The finger First World First interracial kiss on television Forensic anthropology Free Expression Policy Project Fucking Machines God's Choice Erving Goffman History of agriculture Hitachi Magic Wand Hooray Henry I Ching Globalization and women in China Insects in culture Ivatan people Java Man Joint custody (United States) Ralph Larkin Lesbian LGBT Long hair Magic, Witchcraft and the Otherworld The Man-Eating Myth March of loyalty to martyrs Karl Marx Josef Mengele A More Perfect Union: Advancing New American Rights Mork Goes Erk No Lifeguard on Duty Nonviolent Communication Not My Presidents Day Not in Front of the Children On the Internet, nobody knows you're a dog Otaku Polyethnicity Protests against the Sri Lankan Civil War in Canada Proto-globalization Racial wage gap in the United States Reborn doll The Road to Total Freedom Romania in the Early Middle Ages Royal intermarriage Edward Said Sex, Sin, and Blasphemy Sheng nu Social identity theory Sociology of leisure Sociology Stay-at-home dad Sustainability Team effectiveness Think of the children Truce term Max Weber Benjamin Lee Whorf Florian Znaniecki Featured pictures File:Jane Addams - Bain News Service.jpg edit   Things you can do Here are some tasks awaiting attention: Article requests?: Check article requests in Business and economics topics • Social sciences topics • Requested pictures of society topics Assess?: Check article deletion discussions listed at Deletion sorting – Social science Cleanup?: check new articles for cleanup from Sociology-related new article feed Copyedit?: Check Sociology article alerts for interesting articles to copyedit Expand?: Expand articles in categories including: Culture, Law, Education, Politics Featured article candidates?: Review society-related articles submitted at Featured Article candidates, especially those at FAC urgents Good article nominations?: Check out articles under review for Good Article candidacy, in the Social sciences and society section Maintain?: Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Stubs?: Take on project for improvement of one of the Sociology stubs Verify?: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability edit   Related portals Arts Biography Community Culture Death Education Freedom of speech Human rights Internet Law LGBT Mind and brain Philosophy Politics Religion Sexuality Social movements Sociology Technology Writing edit   Web resources Society at DMOZ Definition of Society from the OED. Lecture notes on "Defining Society" from East Carolina University. Internet Modern History Sourcebook: Industrial Revolution "The Day the World Took Off" Six part video series from the University of Cambridge tracing the question "Why did the Industrial Revolution begin when and where it did." BBC History Home Page – Industrial Revolution National Museum of Science and Industry website – machines and personalities Industrial Revolution and the Standard of Living by Clark Nardinelli - the debate over whether standards of living rose or fell. Cliff Notes on Types of Societies edit   Associated Wikimedia Society on Wikibooks  Society on Wikimedia Commons Society on Wikinews  Society on Wikiquote  Society on Wikisource  Society on Wikiversity  Society on Wiktionary  Manuals and books Images and media News Quotations Texts Learning resources Definitions What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Society&oldid=649229924" Categories: Society portal Society Society portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ??????? ???? ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? Català Cebuano Deutsch Eesti ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? Bahasa Indonesia ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Lëtzebuergesch ?????????? Nederlands ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ?????? Polski Português ??????? ????? Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Suomi ???????/tatarça Türkçe ???? ?????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 28 February 2015, at 14:11. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology |||Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Science History of science    Philosophy of science    Systems science    Mathematics    Biology    Chemistry    Physics    Earth sciences    Technology    edit   The Technology Portal Astronaut Technology is the practical use of science, including the making, modification or improvement, applied activity or behavior, use and knowledge of tools, machines, techniques, crafts, systems, methods of organization, or environmental modifications or arrangement in order to solve a problem, improve a preexisting solution to a problem, achieve a goal or perform a specific function. It can also refer to the collection of such tools, machinery, modifications, environmental arrangement and procedures. Technologies significantly affect human as well as other animal species' ability to control and adapt to their natural environments. The word technology comes from Greek ?????????? (technología); from ????? (téchn?), meaning 'art, skill, craft', and -????? (-logía), meaning 'study of-'. The term can be applied either generally or to many specific areas, examples of which include construction technology, medical technology and information technology. The human species' use of technology began with the conversion of natural resources into simple tools. The prehistorical discovery of the ability to control fire increased the available sources of food and the invention of the wheel helped humans in travelling in and controlling their environment. Recent technological developments, including the printing press, the telephone, and the Internet, have lessened physical barriers to communication and allowed humans to interact freely on a global scale. However, not all technology has been used for peaceful purposes; the development of weapons of ever-increasing destructive power has progressed throughout history, from clubs to nuclear weapons. Technology has affected society and its surroundings in a number of ways. In many societies, technology has helped develop more advanced economies (including today's global economy) and has allowed the rise of a leisure class. Many technological processes produce unwanted by-products, known as pollution, and deplete natural resources, to the detriment of the Earth and its environment. Various implementations of technology influence the values of a society and new technology often raises new ethical questions. Examples include the rise of the notion of efficiency in terms of human productivity, a term originally applied only to machines, and the challenge of traditional norms. Philosophical debates have arisen over the present and future use of technology in society, with disagreements over whether technology improves the human condition or worsens it. Neo-Luddism, anarcho-primitivism, and similar movements criticise the pervasiveness of technology in the modern world, opining that it harms the environment and alienates people; proponents of ideologies such as transhumanism and techno-progressivism view continued technological progress as beneficial to society and the human condition. Indeed, until recently, it was believed that the development of technology was restricted only to human beings, but recent scientific studies indicate that other primates and certain dolphin communities have developed simple tools and learned to pass their knowledge to other generations. More about Technology... Refresh selections edit   Selected article The Hanford Site is a decommissioned nuclear production complex on the Columbia River in south-central Washington operated by the United States government. Established in 1943 as part of the Manhattan Project, it was home to the B-Reactor, the first full-scale plutonium production reactor in the world. During the Cold War, the project was expanded to include nine nuclear reactors and five massive plutonium processing complexes, which produced plutonium for most of the 60,000 weapons in the U.S. nuclear arsenal. Nuclear technology developed rapidly during this period, and Hanford scientists produced many notable technological achievements. However, many of the early safety procedures and waste disposal practices were inadequate. Government documents have since confirmed that Hanford's operations released significant amounts of radioactive materials to the air and to the Columbia River, threatening the health of residents and ecosystems. Today, Hanford is the most contaminated nuclear site in the United States and is the focus of the nation's largest environmental cleanup effort. While most of the current activity at the site is related to the cleanup project, Hanford also hosts a commercial nuclear power plant, the Columbia Generating Station, and various centers for scientific research and development. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   In this month 2 April 1975 – Construction of the CN Tower in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, tops out, beginning the 553.33 metres (1,815.4 ft) tower's 34 year reign as the world's tallest free-standing structure 3 April 2010 – The first iPad (pictured) is released by Apple, Inc. 10 April 1861 – Governor of Massachusetts John Albion Andrew signs a charter incorporating the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 15 April 1912 – The RMS Titanic, at the time the world's largest ship, sinks after hitting an iceberg the night before in one of the deadliest peacetime maritime disasters in history More anniversaries... edit   Did you know... ... that in 2010, three of the four largest power stations in the world were in South America? ... that a Rans S-6 Coyote II (pictured), a type of homebuilt aircraft, has flown across the Atlantic Ocean twice? ... that Stephen Fry asked on Twitter for suggestions to name a BBC television series on the impact of the Internet, now called The Virtual Revolution? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured biography John Douglas (1830–1911) was an English architect who designed about 500 buildings in Cheshire, North Wales and northwest England, in particular in the estate of Eaton Hall. Douglas' output included the creation, restoration and renovation of churches, church furnishings, houses and other buildings. His architectural styles were eclectic and many of his works incorporate elements of the English Gothic style. He was also influenced by architectural styles from the mainland of Europe and included elements of French, German and Netherlandish architecture into his works. He is remembered for his use of half-timbering, tile-hanging, pargeting, decorative brick in diapering and the design of tall chimney stacks. Of particular importance is Douglas' use of joinery and highly detailed wood carving. Throughout his career he attracted commissions from wealthy landowners and industrialists. Most of his works have survived. The city of Chester contains a number of his structures, the most admired of which are his half-timbered black-and-white buildings and Eastgate Clock. The highest concentration of his work is found in the Eaton Hall estate and the surrounding villages of Eccleston, Aldford and Pulford. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Wikiprojects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Telecommunications Woodworking What are WikiProjects? edit   Selected quote “ If the Internet teaches us anything, it is that great value comes from leaving core resources in a commons, where they're free for people to build upon as they see fit. ” — Lawrence Lessig, (2001) ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Selected picture Credit: Maas Digital LLC NASA's Mars Exploration Rover Mission (MER) is an ongoing robotic space mission involving two rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, exploring the planet Mars. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories Computing · Classes of computers · Companies · Computer architecture · Computer model · Computer science · Computer security · Computing and society · Data · Embedded systems · Information systems · Information technology · Internet · Languages · Multimedia · Networks · Operating systems · Platforms · Product lifecycle management · Real-time computing · Software · Security ·More... Electronics · Avionics · RF & MMIC Design · Circuits · Companies · Connectors · Consumer electronics · Digital electronics · Digital media · Electrical components · Electronic design · Electronics manufacturing · Embedded systems · Integrated circuits · Microwave technology · Molecular electronics · Water technology · Optoelectronics · Quantum electronics · Radio-frequency identification · Radio electronics · Semiconductors · Signal cables · Surveillance · Telecommunications · Terminology · More... Engineering: Aerospace engineering · Biological engineering · Chemical engineering · Civil engineering · Computer engineering · Electrical engineering · Electronic engineering · Environmental engineering · Geotechnical engineering · Industrial engineering · Marine engineering · Materials science · Mechanical engineering · Nuclear technology · Signal processing · Software engineering · Structural engineering Transport · Aviation · Rail transport · Spaceflight · Road transport · Water transport Timelines: Technology timelines Other sub-categories: Agriculture · Animation · Architecture · Carpentry · Communications · Education · Electrical wiring · Machining · Manufacturing · Medicine · Metalworking · Optics · Plumbing · Tools · Welding · Woodworking edit   Main topics Technology Technological concepts and issues – Appropriate technology • Clean technology • Diffusion of innovations in science • Doomsday device • Ecotechnology • Environmental technology • High technology • History of science and technology • History of technology • Industry • Innovation • Knowledge economy • Persuasion technology • Pollution • Posthumanism • Precautionary principle • Research and development • Science, technology, and society • Strategy of technology • Superpowers • Sustainable technology • Technicism • Technocapitalism • Technocriticism • Techno-progressivism • Technological convergence • Technological evolution • Technological determinism • Technological diffusion • Technological singularity • Technology acceptance model • Technology assessment • Technology lifecycle • Technology transfer • Technology Tree • Technorealism • Timeline of invention • Transhumanism Technologies and applied sciences – Aerospace • Agriculture, Agricultural science & Agronomy • Architecture • Artificial intelligence • Automation • Automobile • Big Science • Biotechnology • Cartography • Chemical engineering • Communication • Computing (Computer science, List of open problems in computer science, Programming, Software engineering, Information technology, Computer engineering) • Construction • Design • Electronics • Energy development • Energy storage • Engineering • Ergonomics • Firefighting • Forensics • Forestry • Free software • Health sciences • Health Informatics • Industry • Information science • Internet • Library and information science • Machines • Management • Manufacturing • Mass communication • Mass production • Medicine (Unsolved problems in neuroscience) • Military science • Military technology and equipment • Mining • Nanotechnology • Nuclear technology • Packaging and labeling • Processes • Robotics • Space exploration • Technology forecasting • Telecommunications • Tools • Transport • Vehicles • Weapons edit   News From the Wikinews Science and technology portal April 8: GNOME to be Ubuntu's default desktop environment, Canonical to stop investing in Ubuntu Phone March 27: President Trump tells NASA to aim for Mars March 22: Jeff Jones resigns as president of Uber March 9: Scientists say excess cerebrospinal fluid may serve as early sign of autism February 9: Scientists say new medical diagnostic chip can sort cells anywhere with an inkjet January 15: Geneticists produce laser-activated killer mice January 4: Slow-cooking dinosaur eggs may have contributed to extinction, say scientists December 29: Around 7,100 cheetahs remain, say experts December 26: Study confirms efficacy of NewLink Genetics ebola vaccine December 11: Scientists find dinosaur feathers preserved in amber edit   Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures edit   Related portals Agriculture and Agronomy Astronomy Aviation Biotechnology Bridges Computer science Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Health Infrastructure Information technology Mathematics Medicine Nanotechnology Nuclear technology Philosophy of science Radio Renewable energy Robotics Science Software Spaceflight Sustainable development Telecom Television Trains Transport War edit   Associated Wikimedia Technology on Wikibooks  Technology on Wikimedia Commons Technology on Wikinews  Technology on Wikiquote  Technology on Wikisource  Technology on Wikiversity  Technology on Wiktionary  Manuals and books Images and media News Quotations Texts Learning resources Definitions edit   Wikipedia's portals All Portals Overview Glossaries Indices Lists Outlines Categories Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Featured portals About portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=737901506" Categories: Technology portal Technology portals Technology Science portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages ???? ??????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? Bahasa Indonesia ????? ??????? Kurdî Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? Nederlands ??? ??????? Occitan ????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ?????? ??????? Suomi Svenska ????? Taqbaylit Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? ???? Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 5 September 2016, at 18:25. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Contents/Portals |||Portal:Contents/Portals From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia < Portal:Contents Jump to: navigation, search Contents Overview Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology edit  watch   Wikipedia's contents: Portals General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places    Health and fitness     History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences    People and self    Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences About portals · Portal directory · Portals category Shortcuts: P: P:CP WP:8 WP:PORT Portals complement main topics in Wikipedia, and expound upon topics by introducing the reader to key articles, images, and categories that further describe the subject and its related topics. Portals also assist in helping editors to find related projects and things they can do to improve Wikipedia, and provide a unique way to navigate Wikipedia topics. At present, there are 1491 portals. WikiProject Directory Regional Notice Boards You can also use the Special:Search box below to locate Portals and sub-pages. edit  watch   General reference   (see in all page types) Library and information science edit  watch   Culture and the arts   (see in all page types) Culture Language: Constructed languages (Esperanto), English Arts (Aesthetics) Literature: Books • Comics • Children's literature • French literature • Poetry • Writing Authors: Jane Austen • Charles Dickens • William Shakespeare • Oscar Wilde • Kazi Nazrul Islam Novels: Dragonlance, Harry Potter, Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy Fictional worlds: Discworld, James Bond, Middle-earth, Narnia, Oz, Fictional characters Performing arts Dance: Ballet Film: A Nightmare on Elm Street, Academy Award, Alien, Animation, Bollywood, Disney, Indiana Jones, Silent film, Star Wars Music: Music of Australia • Music of Canada  • Record production Styles: Alternative rock, Blues, Christian music, Classical guitar, Classical music, Country music, Electronic music, Eurovision, Guitar, Heavy metal (Christian metal), Hip hop, Indian classical music, Industrial music, Jazz, K-pop, Latin music, Marching band, Percussion, Piano, Pipe organ, Pop music, Progressive rock, Punk rock, Rock and Roll, Rock music, R&B and Soul Music Artists: AC/DC, AKB48, A. R. Rahman, Bryan Adams, Aerosmith, Christina Aguilera, Backstreet Boys, The Beach Boys, The Beatles, Justin Bieber, Björk, Brandy Norwood, Mariah Carey, Cher, Kelly Clarkson, The Clash, Miley Cyrus, Celine Dion, Dream Theater, Bob Dylan, Grateful Dead, Eminem, Fergie, Marvin Gaye, Girls Aloud, Green Day, Iron Maiden, The Jackson Family, Janet Jackson, Michael Jackson, The Kinks, Beyoncé, Lady Gaga, Avril Lavigne, Led Zeppelin, Linkin Park, Madonna, Miles Davis, Motörhead, Katy Perry, Pink Floyd, Powderfinger, Elvis Presley, Queen, Rihanna, The Rolling Stones, Sakis Rouvas, Rush, Santana, Britney Spears, The Supremes, Slipknot, Shania Twain, Shreya Ghoshal, U2, Usher, Rufus Wainwright, Neil Young, Frank Zappa, Shakira Opera: Gilbert & Sullivan Television: Australian television, BBC, The Big Bang Theory, Buffy the Vampire Slayer, Cartoon Network, Doctor Who, EastEnders, Ed, Edd n Eddy, Family Guy, Friends, Futurama, House, M.D., M*A*S*H, Millennium, Monty Python, Muppets, Nickelodeon, SpongeBob SquarePants, Star Trek, 24, The Simpsons, Sherlock Holmes Theatre: Musical theatre Visual arts: Portal:Anime and manga (Dragon Ball) • Architecture (Portal) • Cartoon • Computer graphics • Design • Graffiti • Origami • Photography • Studio Ghibli • Textile arts (Fashion, Knitting) • Typography Genre: Comedy • Furry • Horror fiction • King Arthur • Mythology • Pornography • Speculative fiction • Steampunk • Superhero fiction Recreation and Entertainment Food: Bacon Drink: Beer, Coffee, Liquor, Wine Sports: Asian Games · Association football (A-League, Football in Argentina, Association football variants, Football in Africa, Football in Germany, Football in India, English football, Soccer in the United States, Women's association football) • Athletics • Australian rules football • Badminton • Baseball • Basketball (College basketball, National Basketball Association) • Sport of Canada • Commonwealth Games • Cricket (Australian cricket team in England in 1948, Indian Premier League) • Cycling • Fencing • Figure skating • Fishing • Gridiron football (American football, Canadian football, College football, National Football League) • Golf • Gymnastics • Handball • Horse racing • Ice hockey • Martial arts (Karate) • Olympics • Paralympics • Professional wrestling • Racing (Motorsport: Formula One, NASCAR, Motorcycle racing) • Rock climbing • Rugby (Rugby league, Rugby union) • Sailing • Snooker • Tennis • Water sports (Swimming, Underwater diving)  • Women's sport Games: Amusement parks • Strategy games (Chess, Warhammer) • Role-playing games (Dungeons & Dragons) Video games: Final Fantasy • Halo • Mario • Massively multiplayer online games • Nintendo • PlayStation • Pokémon • Sega • SNK  • The Sims • Sonic the Hedgehog • Xbox • Zelda Hobbies, Crafts and Other: Gardening • Gemology and Jewelry • Home improvement • Numismatics • Philately • Radio • Scouting • Toys (Lego) edit  watch   Geography and places   (see in all page types) Geography (Atlas • Islands • Mountains) Africa Algeria • Angola • Benin • Botswana • Burkina Faso • Burundi • Cameroon • Cape Verde • Central African Republic • Chad • Côte d'Ivoire • Republic of the Congo • Democratic Republic of the Congo • Djibouti • Egypt • Eritrea • Ethiopia • Gabon • The Gambia • Ghana • Guinea • Guinea-Bissau • Kenya  (Mombasa, Nairobi) • Liberia • Libya • Madagascar • Malawi • Mali • Mauritania • Mauritius • Morocco • Mozambique • Namibia • Niger • Nigeria (Port Harcourt, Lagos)  • Rwanda • São Tomé and Príncipe • Senegal • Sierra Leone • Somalia • South Africa • South Sudan • Sudan • Tanzania • Togo • Tunisia • Uganda • Western Sahara • Zambia • Zimbabwe Antarctica • Arctic Asia Bhutan • Bangladesh • (Bengal, Chittagong, Dhaka) • Cambodia • China (Beijing, Hong Kong, Macau, Shanghai, Shenzhen, Tibet) • Taiwan • Himalaya region • India (Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal (Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Chandigarh, Chennai, Delhi, Hisar, Hyderabad, Kolkata, Kollam, Mumbai, Patna, Trichy, Udaipur, Jodhpur) • Indonesia • Japan (Osaka, Tokyo) • Kazakhstan • Korea (North Korea, South Korea, Seoul) • Kyrgyzstan • Malaysia • Mongolia • Nepal • Pakistan (Chitral, Karachi, Lahore, Jhelum, Islamabad, Sialkot) • Philippines (Bohol) • Punjab • SAARC • Singapore • Sri Lanka • Tajikistan • Thailand • Turkey • Vietnam Europe European Union Austria (Vienna, Tyrol) • Basque • Belgium (Brussels) • Bulgaria • Channel Islands • Corsica • Croatia • Czech Republic (Prague) • Denmark • Estonia • Finland • France (Paris, Lyon) • Germany (Baden-Württemberg • Bavaria • East Frisia • Hamburg • Lower Saxony • North Rhine-Westphalia • Saxony-Anhalt • Schleswig-Holstein) • Gibraltar • Greece (Macedonia) • Hungary (Budapest, Miskolc) • Ireland (Kilkenny) • Italy (Rome, Milan, Venice) • Latvia • Lithuania • Luxembourg • Malta • Netherlands • Poland • Portugal • Romania  (Bucharest) • Silesia • Slovakia • Slovenia • Spain (Galicia) • Sweden • United Kingdom (England (Bristol, Cornwall, Devon, Hertfordshire, Lincolnshire, London, Luton, Stamford, North West England (Cheshire, Cumbria, Greater Manchester, Merseyside, Yorkshire), Somerset, Wiltshire, South East England (East Sussex, Kent, Hampshire, Oxfordshire)) • Northern Ireland, Scotland, Wales) Albania (Tirana) • Andorra • Armenia • Azerbaijan • Belarus • Bosnia and Herzegovina • Catalan-speaking countries • Faroe Islands • Georgia • Iceland • Isle of Man • Kosovo • Republic of Macedonia • Moldova • Montenegro • Norway • Russia  (Chechnya, Moscow) • Serbia • Switzerland (Geneva) • Turkey • Ukraine (Crimea) • Vatican City Latin America and Caribbean Argentina (Buenos Aires • Rosario)  • Belize • Bermuda • Brazil • Bolivia • Chile (Pichilemu) • Colombia • Costa Rica • Cuba • Dominican Republic • Ecuador • El Salvador • Guatemala • Guyana • Haiti • Jamaica • Mexico • Nicaragua • Panama • Paraguay • Peru • Puerto Rico • Suriname • Trinidad and Tobago • Uruguay • Venezuela Places near you Middle East Afghanistan • Cyprus • Egypt • Iran (Tabaristan) • Iraq • Israel (Jerusalem) • Jordan • Kazakhstan • Kurdistan • Lebanon • Libya • Morocco • Oman • Palestine • Saudi Arabia • Syria • Tajikistan • Turkey • United Arab Emirates (Abu Dhabi) • Uzbekistan  North America Canada:  • Geography of Canada Alberta (Calgary, Edmonton) • British Columbia (Vancouver) • Manitoba • New Brunswick • Newfoundland and Labrador (St. John's) • Northwest Territories • Nova Scotia • Nunavut • Ontario (Eastern Ontario • Ottawa •Toronto • Hamilton) • Prince Edward Island  • Quebec (Montreal, Quebec City, Estrie, Laurentides, Saguenay–Lac-Saint-Jean) • Saskatchewan • Yukon Mexico  San Diego–Tijuana United States Alabama • Alaska • Arizona (Grand Canyon) • Arkansas • California (Greater Los Angeles • San Diego • San Diego–Tijuana, San Francisco Bay Area) • Colorado • Connecticut • Delaware • District of Columbia • Florida  (Jacksonville • Miami) • Georgia • Hawaii • Idaho • Illinois (Chicago) • Indiana (Indianapolis) • Iowa • Kansas • Kentucky (Louisville) • Louisiana (New Orleans) • Maine • Maryland • Massachusetts  (Boston) • Michigan (Detroit) • Minnesota • Mississippi • Missouri • Montana • Nebraska • Nevada (Las Vegas) • New England • New Hampshire • New Jersey • New Mexico • New York (New York City • Capital District • Finger Lakes • Hudson Valley • Syracuse) • North Carolina • North Dakota • Ohio (Cleveland) • Oklahoma • Oregon • Pennsylvania (Erie • Lancaster • Philadelphia • Pittsburgh) • Puerto Rico • Rhode Island • South Carolina • South Dakota • Tennessee • Texas (Austin • Dallas • Houston) • Utah • Vermont • Virginia • Washington (Seattle) • West Virginia • Wisconsin • Wyoming Oceania Australia Australian Capital Territory • New South Wales (City of Bankstown • Sydney) • Northern Territory • Queensland (Brisbane) • South Australia • Tasmania • Victoria (Melbourne) • Western Australia (Perth) Kiribati • Micronesia • New Zealand • Papua New Guinea • Tuvalu edit  watch   Health and fitness   (see in all page types) Health and fitness Medicine • Biology • Nursing • Dentistry • Food • Pharmacy and Pharmacology • Psychiatry • Pervasive developmental disorders • Complementary and Alternative Medicine • Sexuality • Viruses • Trauma & Orthopaedics • Sports edit  watch   History and events   (see in all page types) History American Old West • Ancient Egypt • Ancient Germanic Culture • Ancient Greece • Ancient Japan • Ancient Near East • Ancient Rome (Military of ancient Rome) • Anglo-Saxon England • Crown of Aragon • Archaeology • Ashura • Austria-Hungary • British Empire • Bulgarian Empire • Byzantine Empire • Classical Civilization • Colonialism • Disasters  • German Empire • Heraldry • History of Canada • History of the Latter Day Saint movement • History of Science • Indian independence movement • Khitan • Mesoamerica • Middle Ages • Nazi Germany • New France • Russian Empire • Sasanian Empire • Soviet Union  War:American Revolutionary War • American Civil War • Cold War • Italian Wars • Liberation War • Military history of France • Military history of Africa • Military history of the Ottoman Empire • Napoleonic Wars • September 11 attacks • Syrian civil war • World War I • World War II 1920s • 1930s • 1940s • 1950s • 1960s • 1970s • 1980s • 1990s • 2000s • 2010s Current events Sports Time Winter • Autumn Chronology edit  watch   Mathematics and logic   (see in all page types) Mathematics Algebra • Analysis • Category theory • Cryptography • Discrete mathematics • Geometry • Number theory • Topology Logic Set theory  Statistics  edit  watch   Natural and physical sciences   (see in all page types) Science History of Science • Philosophy of science • Systems science Biological science Agropedia • Amphibians and Reptiles • Animals • Arthropods • Astrobiology • Birds • Cats • Cetaceans • Crustaceans • Dinosaurs • Dogs • Ecology • Evolutionary biology • Extinct and Endangered Species • Fish • Forestry • Fungi • Gastropods • Horses • Insects  • Mammals • Marine life • Molecular Anthropology • Molecular and Cellular Biology (Metabolism, Gene wiki) • Neuroscience • Paleontology • Plants • Primates • Prehistoric mammals • Rabbits and hares • Sharks • Trees • Turtles • Viruses • Wildlife of Scotland • Wetlands Physical science Astronomy (Space, Solar System, Mars, Moon, Uranus, Jupiter, Star, X-ray astronomy)  Chemistry (Analytical chemistry, Organic chemistry, Physical chemistry, Crystallography)  Earth sciences (Atmospheric sciences, Earthquakes, Environment, Fire, Global warming, Tropical cyclones, Volcanoes and Volcanology, Weather, Water)  Physics (Cosmology, Gravitation, Electromagnetism) edit  watch   People and self   (see in all page types) Biography • Death • Human rights • Community • Gangs • Mind and brain • Thinking • Sexuality • LGBT • Serer • Transgender • Yoruba • Igbo edit  watch   Philosophy and thinking   (see in all page types) Philosophy Areas of philosophical inquiry Aesthetics • Epistemology • Ethics • Logic • Metaphysics • Mind and Brain (Thinking) • Philosophy of science • Social and political philosophy  Philosophies and ideologies Anarchism • Animal rights • Capitalism • Communism • Confucianism • Conservatism • Existentialism • Fascism • Liberalism • Libertarianism • Left-wing populism • Right-wing populism • Socialism • Taoism • Transhumanism edit  watch   Religion and belief systems   (see in all page types) Religion (Spirituality, Occult) Abrahamic religions Christianity Adventism • Anabaptism • Anglicanism • Arminianism • Baptist • Bible • Calvinism • Catholicism • Christadelphians • Christianity in China • Christianity in India • Eastern Christianity • Lutheranism • Methodism • Oriental Orthodoxy • Pope • Private revelation • Saints • Seventh-day Adventist Church Latter Day Saints Book of Mormon • LDS Church • Community of Christ Islam Shia Islam • Day Of Ashura • Ahmadiyyat • Qur'an • Islam in China • Sufism Judaism Kabbalah Creationism Non-Abrahamic religions Indian religions Ayyavazhi Buddhism Mahayana Buddhism • Tibetan Buddhism • Vajrayana Buddhism • Theravada Buddhism Gnosticism Hinduism Hindu Mythology  Jainism Digambara ?v?t?mbara Sikhism Religions and traditions with East Asian origin Chinese Folk Religion Confucianism • Shinto • Taoism • Falun Gong Religions with West Asian origin Zoroastrianism Bábism Bahá'í Faith New religions Scientology • Falun Gong  Theosophy Religions with European origin Heathenism Hellenismos Greek Mythology Wicca Traditional African religions African Serer Other Astrology • Mythology Non Religion or Belief Atheism • Nontheism edit  watch   Society and social sciences   (see in all page types) Social sciences Anthropology (Archaeology) • Economics • Education • Geography • History • Law • Linguistics • Psychology • Sociology Society Cooperatives • Disability • Discrimination • Economics and business  • Education (Schools, University, University of Cambridge, University of Oxford, University of Pittsburgh) • Environment • Ethnic groups: African American, Berbers, Celts, Hispanic and Latino Americans, Indigenous peoples of the Americas, Indigenous peoples of North America, Aboriginal Canadians •  Feminism • Folklore • Freedom of speech • Freemasonry • Gender studies • Genealogy • Globalization • Holidays • Hunger relief • Journalism • LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender) • (Transgender) • Men's rights • Social movements • Sustainable development • Terrorism • Transhumanism • Transnational child protection•Migrant Domestic Workers in Lebanon Law Criminal justice• Human rights • Law of England and Wales• Laws in India • Supreme Court of the United States Politics and Political science Anarchism • Animal rights • British politics • Capitalism • Communism • Canadian politics • Christian democracy • Conservatism • Fascism • Geert Wilders • India Government • Liberalism • Right-wing populism • International organizations: (United Nations  • NATO • SAARC) • Organized Labour • Pakistan Government • Philippine Presidency • Republican Party • U.S. Government (Barack Obama) • Donald Trump  • Social welfare and social work Military science Canadian Forces • Military of Greece • Military of Australia • Military of the United Kingdom (British Army • Royal Navy • Royal Air Force) • Military of the United States (United States Air Force • United States Army • United States Coast Guard • United States Marine Corps • United States Navy) • Tank • Half-track • War • Weapons of mass destruction edit  watch   Technology and applied sciences   (see in all page types) Technology Engineering • Agriculture and Agronomy  • Astronomy • Biotechnology • Bridges • Electronics (Telecommunication) • Mass surveillance • Energy (Renewable energy) • Forestry • Hazardous Materials • Infrastructure • Laser • Mining • Nanotechnology • Nuclear technology • Robotics Computing and Information technology Computer networking (Internet, IRC) • Computer programming (Python programming, Java) • Computer science (Artificial intelligence, Computer graphics) • Computer security (Cryptography) • Software (Free software, Linux) • Amiga  • Smartphone • Apple  • Google (Android) • Microsoft• Alphabet Transport Aviation • Bicycles/Cycling • Buses • Cars (Australian, Japanese) • Trucks • London Transport • Nautical (Lighthouses, UK Waterways) • Roads (Australian Roads, Canada Roads, U.S. Roads, California Roads, Maryland Roads, Michigan Highways, New York Roads, Washington Roads) • Spaceflight • Trains (North American railways, Railways in India, Sri Lanka Railways, UK Railways, Trams, UK Trams) Portals List Directory WikiProject Guidelines Instructions Categorizing (Portals category) Contents Overview Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Content listings Types Overviews Featured content Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories People deaths this year Timelines centuries decades Indices A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Wikipedia books What are portals? List of portals Shortcuts to this page: Portal:Categories • P:CAT Purge cache to show recent changes Shortcuts to this page: WP:PORT • P: Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Contents/Portals&oldid=746645444" Categories: Wikipedia navigation Content portals Portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Afrikaans Alemannisch ??????? Aragonés Arpetan ??????? ???? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Brezhoneg Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Frysk ??? ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Lëtzebuergesch Lumbaart Magyar ???? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? ????????? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Ripoarisch Român? ??????? Shqip Sicilianu ????? ???? Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ???? Vèneto Ti?ng Vi?t ?? Yorùbá ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 28 October 2016, at 17:20. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Stephen_Breyer_official_SCOTUS_portrait_crop.jpg |||File:Stephen Breyer official SCOTUS portrait crop.jpg From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this preview: 480 × 600 pixels. Other resolutions: 192 × 240 pixels | 384 × 480 pixels | 1,008 × 1,260 pixels. Original file ?(1,008 × 1,260 pixels, file size: 1.01 MB, MIME type: image/jpeg) This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary[edit] DescriptionStephen Breyer official SCOTUS portrait crop.jpg Official portrait of Supreme Court Justice Stephen Breyer. Date 2006 Source http://www.supremecourthistory.org/history/supremecourthistory_history_current_breyer.htm Author Steve Petteway, photographer for the US Supreme Court[1] Licensing[edit] Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work prepared by an officer or employee of the United States Government as part of that person’s official duties under the terms of Title 17, Chapter 1, Section 105 of the US Code. See Copyright. Note: This only applies to original works of the Federal Government and not to the work of any individual U.S. state, territory, commonwealth, county, municipality, or any other subdivision. This template also does not apply to postage stamp designs published by the United States Postal Service since 1978. (See § 313.6(C)(1) of Compendium of U.S. Copyright Office Practices). It also does not apply to certain US coins; see The US Mint Terms of Use. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law, including all related and neighboring rights. This file was reviewed on 29 September 2010 by the administrator or trusted user Jappalang (talk), who confirmed the Public Domain status on that date. Personality rightsPersonality rights warning Although this work is freely licensed or in the public domain, the person(s) shown may have rights that legally restrict certain re-uses unless those depicted consent to such uses. In these cases, a model release or other evidence of consent could protect you from infringement claims. Though not obliged to do so, the uploader may be able to help you to obtain such evidence. See our general disclaimer for more information. File history Click on a date/time to view the file as it appeared at that time. Date/Time Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 13:47, 10 August 2009 1,008 × 1,260 (1.01 MB) Gage {{Information |Description=Official portrait of Supreme Court Justice Stephen Breyer. |Source=http://www.supremecourthistory.org/02_history/subs_current/images_b/009.html |Date=2006 |Author=Collection of the Supreme Court of the United States, Photographe File usage More than 100 pages link to this file. The following list shows the first 100 page links to this file only. A full list is available. List of Jewish American politicians Supreme Court of the United States Talk:Main Page/Archive 34 User:4v4l0n42/Draft 6L User:4v4l0n42/Today User:Afterword User:Afterword/pretty User:AlMac User:Allard User:Bannus User:Brian/mainpage User:David Levy/Main2 User:David Levy/Test User:David Levy/Test2 User:Dbmag9/Main Page User:Drumguy8800/Main page draft User:ElAmericano/storage/mainpage1 User:Eloquence/Tour 01 User:Encephalon/Main User:FayssalF User:Getcrunk/Main Page Sandbox User:Go for it!/MP/nodiv User:Hemanshu/edmainpage User:Interiot/Main User:Jcrwiki~enwiki User:JonMoore/Main Page User:JustinWick/mydraft User:Kevin baas~enwiki/main page proposal User:Krik~enwiki/mp User:Krik~enwiki/nmp User:LEC20/Daily Diversions User:Lovelac7 User:Malomeat User:MarSch/Main body User:MarSch/Main page User:MattKingston User:Member/Wikipedia Front Page User:Mulad/portal User:Nickg331 User:NoSeptember/Main User:Node ue/MainPageTemplate2 User:Persian Poet Gal User:Porges/Main Page User:Quentin Smith/Shadow Main Page User:Ral315/Main Page User:RaptorX User:Siroxo/main page draft User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-22Jul User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-23Jul User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-24Jul User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-25Jul User:Somoza/Zero-Phonon User:Talrias/Main Page User:Tazmaniacs User:The bellman User:Thetorpedodog/xptablefree User:Tim Robinson/Main Page (Proposal) User:Tom-/Main Page CSS test User:Tom-/NS4 test User:Tom-/sandbox User:U-Two User:Vincent7 User:Zafiroblue05/Draft User talk:Guty~enwiki User talk:Kevin baas~enwiki/main page proposal Wikipedia:Main Page/French2 Wikipedia:Main Page/Temp10 Wikipedia:Main Page/Test Wikipedia:Main Page/test Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (Italian-style) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (Old PDA version) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (blue boy) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (editable) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (executive) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (misty breeze) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (regal) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (shades of blue) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (simple layout) Wikipedia:Today's featured article Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft/Draft 5 Archive Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft/Sj Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft/Test Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft2 Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft2 (fullsize text) Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft (Italian Inspired) Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft (current templates) Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft 0 Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft 6C Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft A Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft B Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft C Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft L Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft NOW Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft extra search box Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft extra search box2 Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft no search box Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/NOW Global file usage The following other wikis use this file: Usage on cs.wikipedia.org Nejvyšší soud Spojených stát? amerických Usage on de.wikipedia.org Liste der Richter am Obersten Gerichtshof der Vereinigten Staaten Usage on es.wikipedia.org Estados Unidos contra Lara Usage on fa.wikipedia.org ????? ??????????? ????? ???????? Usage on it.wikipedia.org Corte suprema degli Stati Uniti d'America Usage on ja.wikipedia.org ???????? Usage on ko.wikipedia.org ?? ?? ??? Usage on mr.wikipedia.org ????????? ???????? ???????? Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Suprema Corte dos Estados Unidos Usage on ru.wikipedia.org ????????? ??? ??? Usage on sh.wikipedia.org Vrhovni sud SAD Usage on sv.wikipedia.org USA:s högsta domstol Usage on tl.wikipedia.org Kataas-taasang Hukuman ng Estados Unidos Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Amerika Birle?ik Devletleri Yüksek Mahkemesi Usage on zh.wikipedia.org ?????? Metadata This file contains additional information, probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state, some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Orientation Normal Horizontal resolution 300 dpi Vertical resolution 300 dpi Software used Adobe Photoshop 7.0 File change date and time 08:52, 10 August 2009 Color space sRGB Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Stephen_Breyer_official_SCOTUS_portrait_crop.jpg" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces File Talk Variants Views Read View on Commons More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Upload file Special pages Page information Languages Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heffernan_v._City_of_Paterson |||Heffernan v. City of Paterson From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Heffernan v. City of Paterson Supreme Court of the United States Argued January 19, 2016 Decided April 26, 2016 Full case name Jeffrey Heffernan, Petitioner v. City of Paterson, et al. Docket nos. 14-1280 Citations 578 U.S. ___ (more) Opinion announcement Opinion announcement Prior history Jury finds in favor of the plaintiff, judge recuses for conflict of interest and case is retried; summary judgement in favor of the defense; Third Circuit reverses and remands; decision for the defense on remand; Third Circuit affirms Holding Police department's demotion of detective in response to mistaken belief he was supporting a challenger to the city's mayor in election violated his First Amendment rights regardless of his actual purpose. Judgement of the Third Circuit reversed and remanded. Court membership Chief Justice John G. Roberts Associate Justices Anthony Kennedy Clarence Thomas · Ruth Bader Ginsburg Stephen Breyer · Samuel Alito Sonia Sotomayor · Elena Kagan Case opinions Majority Breyer, joined by Roberts, Kennedy, Ginsburg, Sotomayor, Kagan Dissent Thomas, joined by Alito Laws applied U.S. Const. amend. I 42 U.S.C. § 1983 Heffernan v. City of Paterson, No. 14-1280, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in 2016 concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees. By a 6–2 margin, the Court held that a public employee's constitutional rights might be violated when an employer, believing that the employee was engaging in what would be protected speech, disciplines them because of that belief, even if the employee did not exercise such a constitutional right. The case was brought after Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey police force, went to a distribution center and picked up a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor in the 2005 election (Heffernan's mother had wanted a sign, so he was getting one for her). While Heffernan did not support the challenger, after other officers saw him with the sign they told senior officers, including the police chief, who strongly supported the mayor. For his apparent public support of the other candidate, they demoted Heffernan to beat patrol work as a uniformed officer. Heffernan brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his First Amendment rights. The case took a decade to reach the Supreme Court. For most of that time it was in federal district court, where it was heard by three different judges. A jury verdict in Heffernan's favor was set aside. A later summary judgment in the city's favor was overturned on appeal before being granted again in the third trial.[1] Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer stated that the department's belief was all that mattered, since the Court's precedent in this area holds it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee (who does not work under a contract that explicitly permits such discipline) for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion in which he was joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed, but his constitutional rights had not been violated. Contents 1 Legal background 2 Prior history 2.1 Original dispute 2.2 District court 2.3 Court of Appeals 2.4 Supreme Court 2.4.1 Oral arguments 3 Opinion of the Court 3.1 Dissent 4 Commentary 5 Aftermath 6 See also 7 References Legal background[edit] The First Amendment guarantees the rights of freedom of speech and peaceable assembly, among others. While not explicitly mentioned, the Supreme Court has held that the right to assembly includes the freedom of association, particularly political association.[2] These protections not only prohibit the government from passing laws which infringe upon these rights, but also from taking actions which would violate them. While the Bill of Rights—which includes the First Amendment—applied originally only to the federal government, the ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment allowed for the application of the Bill of Rights to the states under the incorporation doctrine.[3] In order to better protect these rights in the Reconstruction Era, Congress passed the Second Enforcement Act of 1871 at the request of President Ulysses S. Grant to better counter white supremacist organizations such as the Ku Klux Klan that were intimidating and suppressing voting by black citizens.[4] The act provided a remedy for those citizens who were deprived of their constitutional rights under the "color of any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage, of any State or Territory or the District of Columbia" and is currently codified at 42 U.S.C. § 1983.[5] With its decision in Monroe v. Pape (1961), the Court expanded the reach of section 1983 such that it is now used as a method of checking abuse by state officials who infringe upon constitutionally protected rights.[6][7] The First Amendment protects public employees from retaliation by their employer when speaking on matters of public concern.[8] In Pickering v. Board of Education (1968), the Court first articulated the right of public employees to be protected from dismissal for exercising their right to free speech. There, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of a teacher who was fired after writing a letter to a local newspaper critical of its handling of a recent bond issue.[9] Eight years later, this protection from dismissal was extended to cover partisan political ideology and affiliation in Elrod v. Burns.[8] But the Court has recognized that the "government as employer" has wider constitutional latitude in its decisions than the "government as sovereign".[10] In order to adequately delineate the limits of the government-as-employer's discretion, the Court developed a framework in Connick v. Myers (1983) known as the Connick test. It consists of elements. The first is the threshold a plaintiff must pass to state a claim: the plaintiff must show that they were speaking on a matter of public concern. The second falls to the employer: they must show that the harm to workplace efficiency outweighs the harm caused by infringing upon the right to free speech.[11] In Waters v. Churchill (1994), the Court was faced with two differing accounts of the speech at issue. The question presented to the Court was whether the Connick test ought be applied to what the employer thought was said or what was actually said. The case revolved around a nurse dismissed for a conversation she had with a coworker. There was a discrepancy between what she argued was said and what her employer thought was said. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, joined by a plurality of justices, opined that the Connick test must be applied to the speech the employer thought occurred, and on which it acted, rather than that which the finder of fact determines did occur.[12] Prior history[edit] Original dispute[edit] Downtown Paterson In 2005, Jeffrey Heffernan was a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey police. His supervisor and the chief of police were both appointed by the city's incumbent mayor, Jose Torres, who was being challenged by city councilman Lawrence Spagnola in that year's election. Heffernan was friendly with Spagnola, a former police chief,[1] and informally supported his campaign. He could not vote in the election as he did not live in the city.[13] At the request of his sick mother, who did live in the city, Heffernan while off-duty picked up a Spagnola lawn sign for her after her previous sign was stolen. Other officers saw him at the distribution location holding a sign and talking to Spagnola campaign staff. They soon notified superiors, and the next day officials demoted Heffernan from detective to patrol officer for his perceived "overt involvement" with the Spagnola campaign.[14] District court[edit] Heffernan sued the city, the mayor, and his superior officers under 42 U.S.C. §1983 in the federal District Court for New Jersey, claiming that his rights of freedom of speech as well as freedom of association had been violated.[15] Heffernan contended that while he had not actually engaged in any protected speech, the department acted on the belief that he had, and the department should not have demoted him on the basis of that erroneous belief.[14] In 2009, a jury found for Heffernan and awarded him damages from the police officials and the city. Despite the verdict, Heffernan sought a retrial because Judge Peter G. Sheridan had not allowed him to pursue the freedom of speech claim; the defense did so as well because Judge Sheridan had allowed the freedom of association claim. While considering these motions, Judge Sheridan became aware of a conflict of interest through a former law firm and set aside the verdict, setting a new date for trial before Judge Dennis M. Cavanaugh.[16] Judge Cavanaugh granted summary judgment to the defendants on the freedom of speech claim based on their earlier motions, holding that Heffernan had not engaged in protected speech so his rights could not have been violated. In 2012, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals reversed Judge Cavanaugh's ruling and remanded the case to him with instructions that he was to allow Heffernan to present his freedom of association claim and consider the facts from the jury trial when reconsidering the summary-judgment motions.[16] Judge Kevin McNulty heard the case on remand. After considering the parties' motions for summary judgment again, he ruled in the city's favor in 2014. Heffernan, he ruled, had not engaged in any protected speech or expressive conduct. Judge McNulty also ruled that Heffernan could not prevail on claims that his perceived speech was protected, per Ambrose v. Robinson Township, a previous case on that issue in the Third Circuit,[17] or that his actions were protected since they aided and abetted speech.[18] Judge McNulty also rejected similar claims for freedom of association. He decided that Dye v. Office of the Racing Commission, a case in which the Sixth Circuit had held that the First Amendment reached perceived political association,[19] was not a precedent he could rely on since Dye itself explicitly rejected Ambrose, and as a district judge he could not reject circuit precedent.[20] Court of Appeals[edit] On appeal to the Third Circuit, a three-judge panel of Judge Robert Cowen, Judge Morton Ira Greenberg and Judge Thomas I. Vanaskie unanimously held for the city.[1] In a decision issued in 2015, Judge Vanaskie, writing for the Court, reiterated Judge McNulty's finding that Heffernan's actions in picking up the sign for his mother did not constitute protected speech or association. He distinguished the case at hand from the Sixth Circuit's ruling in Dye by noting that in that case, the employers had inferred the employees' intent from their non-participation in partisan politics rather than an actual action they had taken, as had occurred in Heffernan's case.[1] Judge Vanaskie instead found guidance from the Supreme Court's 1994 holding in Waters v. Churchill, in which it had upheld an Illinois public hospital's dismissal of a nurse for her comments about a supervisor to a colleague, despite an ongoing factual dispute about the substance of those comments. The Court found that the hospital administration had made a reasonable attempt to investigate what the nurse had said before firing her. In that case, the Court had said explicitly that disciplining employees for things they did not actually do did not rise to the level of a constitutional violation.[1] Supreme Court[edit] Following the Third Circuit's decision, Heffernan petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari, requesting they hear the case. After the Court considered both Heffernan's petition and the city's reply, it granted the petition on the first day of the 2015 term. Both parties consented to the filing of amicus curiae briefs by uninvolved parties who believed they had a stake in the outcome of the case. The National Association of Government Employees, Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, and Thomas Jefferson Center for the Protection of Free Expression filed amicus briefs in support of Heffernan, while the New Jersey State League of Municipalities and the National Conference of State Legislatures filed briefs in support of the City of Paterson.[21] The United States government also filed an amicus brief in support of Heffernan, as well as a motion to appear at oral argument, which the Court granted, meaning the Solicitor General's office would be appearing at oral arguments, held on January 19, 2016.[22] Oral arguments[edit] External video Heffernan v. City of Paterson Oral Argument, C-SPAN[23] Mark Frost, arguing for petitioner Jeffrey Heffernan, was immediately met with questions from the justices: Anthony Kennedy asked for clarification on the particular right to be protected, and Antonin Scalia, Samuel Alito and Chief Justice John Roberts all questioned him about whether his rights could be infringed if he was not actually engaged in any speech.[24] Justice Scalia (who died before the decision was announced) argued that there was "no constitutional right not to be fired for the wrong reason."[25] Frost responded that the motives of the government, rather than the actions of the individual, were important in this case. Assistant to the Solicitor General Ginger Anders, arguing on behalf of the United States as amicus curiae in favor of Heffernan, continued this argument, stating that there is "a First Amendment right not to have adverse action taken against him by his employer for the unconstitutional purpose of suppressing disfavored political beliefs."[25] Arguing for respondents, Thomas Goldstein distinguished between political neutrality and political apathy. He argued that the First Amendment protects political neutrality, the conscious choice to not take a position, but does not protect political apathy, when a person simply does not care and makes no particular choice to be neutral.[24] As Heffernan claimed that he had no affiliation with Spagnola, the respondents argued that Heffernan's actions constitute unprotected apathy rather than a conscious choice of neutrality.[26] Justice Elena Kagan questioned Goldstein as to the purpose of the First Amendment saying, "the idea has to do with why the government acted" to which he responded, "It's called an individual right, not a government wrong."[25] Frost took a rebuttal to respond to Goldstein's distinction between political neutrality and apathy, arguing that there is little distinction as the government is acting for impermissible reasons in both cases.[24] Opinion of the Court[edit] Justice Stephen Breyer delivered the opinion of the Court. In a 6–2 decision authored by Justice Stephen Breyer, the Court reversed the ruling of the lower court and ruled that the employer's motive is material to First Amendment challenges. Citing Waters v. Churchill, Justice Breyer wrote, [W]e conclude that, as in Waters, the government's reason for demoting Heffernan is what counts here. When an employer demotes an employee out of a desire to prevent the employee from engaging in political activity that the First Amendment protects, the employee is entitled to challenge that unlawful action under the First Amendment ... —even if, as here, the employer makes a factual mistake about the employee's behavior.[27] The Court remanded the case to the Third Circuit and made clear in its opinion that, while it is impermissible to retaliate based upon perceived protected speech, the lower courts should take into consideration whether Heffernan was disciplined for violating any different and neutral policies.[28] The majority provided three main arguments in support of its reasoning: that their interpretation is more in line with the text of the First Amendment, that it better served the First Amendment's purpose of limiting political patronage, and that such an interpretation will not significantly burden employers.[29] Justice Breyer argued that unlike the Fourteenth Amendment, which focuses on the rights of the people, the First Amendment focuses on the actions of the government when it says, "Congress shall make no law ... abridging the freedom of speech."[30] As the text of the amendment focuses on the government's abilities to make laws, it is the government's actions and motives, not the actual actions of citizens, which are proscribed by the Amendment. While the policy at issue was not a law of Congress, the actions were still that of a government official that infringed upon rights guaranteed by the First Amendment.[27] The Court supported this interpretation by recognizing that the First Amendment sought to prevent government actions from discouraging protected activity.[31] Citing Branti v. Finkel, the Court pointed out that precedent never required plaintiffs in political affiliation cases to show change in allegiance to be successful, and similarly extended that logic to this case: the potential chilling effect on constitutionally protected speech still exists, regardless of the factual basis of the employer's reasoning.[32] Because employees thinking of engaging in protected activity will be equally dissuaded by an incorrect dismissal as by a correct dismissal, both reasonings should be considered in violation of the First Amendment.[33] Respondents argued that finding employers liable for factual mistakes would place substantial costs upon employers.[33] The Court rejected this argument, saying that an employee would still need to prove the employer acted out of an improper motive. Referring to Heffernan's case and those like it, the Court said that "the employee will, if anything, find it more difficult to prove that motive, for the employee will have to point to more than his own conduct to show an employer's intent".[33] Dissent[edit] Justice Thomas authored the dissent. Justice Clarence Thomas authored the dissent, in which Justice Samuel Alito joined. Justice Thomas argued that the previous ruling should have been upheld "because federal law does not provide a cause of action to plaintiffs whose constitutional rights have not been violated".[34] The dissent focused on the text of the statute Heffernan was suing under: 42 U.S.C. § 1983. The statute provides a cause of action only for those whose rights have actually been violated by the government. Because Heffernan maintained that he had not been exercising his First Amendment rights, the dissent argued that those rights could not have been violated, and that a section 1983 claim requires that the employee engage in protected activity and that the employer retaliate against that activity.[35] The dissent argued that, for a section 1983 claim to be valid, "harm alone is not enough; it has to be the right kind of harm."[36] Thomas provided an example of a law allowing police to pull over any driver without cause. This would obviously violate the Fourth Amendment rights of anyone stopped, but people stuck in traffic who were injured by the collateral damage of unconstitutional actions would not be able to sue because none of their rights was violated. Similarly, it is not enough for Heffernan to have shown injury but violation of an actual right as well. For the dissent, even if the dismissal was for the wrong reason and harm was suffered, the dismissal cannot infringe upon rights he never exercised.[37] Further supporting their argument, the dissent cited Monterey v. Del Monte Dunes at Monterey, Ltd. to argue that a Section 1983 claim falls under tort law, in order to draw a distinction between how attempts are handled under tort and criminal law. Under criminal law, a factually impossible attempt to commit a crime, such as trying to steal from an empty pocket or defraud someone with no money, can still be tried as an attempt. No such doctrine exists in tort law. Because Heffernan was not engaged in protected activity, the police department could only have attempted to deprive him of his right, so his suit must fail because "there are no attempted torts."[38] Commentary[edit] The day after oral arguments, writer Gilad Edelman criticized the Court's assumption that Heffernan never exercised his First Amendment rights, saying, "the Supreme Court may miss an opportunity to make sure that cases like his really are rare."[39] Edelman interpreted Heffernan's actions as being well within the existing First Amendment precedent. Though Heffernan was not necessarily supporting the candidate, he was talking and associating with people connected to the candidate, actions already protected under existing precedent. Edelman suggested that, regardless of whether or not Heffernan intended to be identified as supporting the campaign, he was still punished by the city for associating.[39] Soon after the ruling was announced, the decision was largely praised. Jonathan Stahl, a writer at the Constitution Daily, said that "[t]he potential impact of this case on our understanding of the First Amendment is notable."[40] Similarly, The Economist called it "good law" and a "significant development" for expanding the existing jurisprudence to perceived speech, not just actual speech.[41] Aftermath[edit] Subsequent to the Supreme Court's ruling, the City of Paterson approved a $1.6 million settlement payout to Heffernan. The final payment of the settlement is due on September 30, 2017.[42] See also[edit] Freedom of speech portal New Jersey portal Supreme Court of the United States portal US labor law Spoils system 2015 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 578 References[edit] ^ a b c d e Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 777 F.3d 147, 149 (3rd Cir., 2015). Hereafter distinguished as Heffernan III. ^ NAACP v. Alabama, 357 U.S. 499 (1958). ^ Incorporation Doctrine, Cornell University Law School, (last visited June 20, 2016). ^ Allen Trelease, White Terror: The Ku Klux Klan Conspiracy and Southern Reconstruction 387-388 (1971). ^ 42 U.S.C. § 1983. ^ Karen M. Blum & Kathryn R. Urbonya, Section 1983 Litigation (1998) ^ Monroe v. Pape, 365 U.S. 167 (1961). ^ a b Elrod v. Burns, 427 U.S. 347 (1976). ^ Pickering v. Board of Education, 391 U.S. 563 (1968). ^ Waters v. Churchill, 511 U.S. 661, 671 (1994). ^ David Hudson, Balancing Act: Public Employees and Free Speech, 3 First Reports 23 (2002). ^ Waters v. Churchill, at 679–681. ^ Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 2 F.Supp.3d 563, 566 (D.N.J., 2014). Hereafter distinguished as Heffernan II. ^ a b Heffernan v. City of Paterson, No. 14-1280, 578 U.S. ___, slip op. at 2 (2016). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 2–3. ^ a b Heffernan II, at 568 (citing the earlier 2012 decision). ^ Ambrose v. Robinson Township, 303 F. 3d 488 (3rd Cir., 2002). ^ Heffernan II, 570–76. ^ Dye v. Office of the Racing Commission, 702 F.3d 286 (6th Cir. 2012). ^ Heffernan II, 579–581. ^ Amicus curiae briefs in support of petitioners: Brief for the National Association of Government Employees as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Nov. 16, 2015). Brief for the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Nov. 23, 2015). Brief for the Thomas Jefferson Center for the Protection of Free Expression, et al. as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Nov. 23, 2015). Amicus briefs in support of respondents: Brief for the New Jersey State League of Municipalities as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Dec. 23, 2015). Brief for the National Conference of State Legislatures, et al. as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Dec. 23, 2015). ^ No. 14-1280, United States Supreme Court (Apr. 29, 2016). ^ "Heffernan v. City of Paterson Oral Argument". C-SPAN. January 19, 2016. Retrieved April 19, 2017.  ^ a b c Howard Wasserman, Argument analysis: The First Amendment, political inactivity, and improper government motive, SCOTUSblog (Jan. 20, 2016). ^ a b c Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 578 U.S. ___ (2016) (Oral Arguments). ^ Transcript of Oral Argument at 31, Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 578 US ___ (2016) ^ a b Heffernan, slip op. at 6. ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 8. ^ Howard Wasserman, Opinion analysis: Improper motive can violate the First Amendment, even with a factual mistake, SCOTUSblog (Apr. 26, 2016). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6 (citing U.S. Const. amend. I) (internal quotations omitted). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6–7 ("The constitutional harm at issue in the ordinary [free speech] case consists in large part of discouraging employees—both the employee discharged (or demoted) and his or her colleagues—from engaging in protected activities."). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6–7 (citing Branti v. Finkel, 445 U.S. 507, 517). ^ a b c Heffernan, slip op. at 7. ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 1 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 2–4 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 5 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 4 (Thomas, J., dissenting) citing United States v. Stefonek, 179 F. 3d (7th Cir. 1999). . ^ a b Gilad Edelman, Heffernan v. Paterson and an Absurd First Amendment Doctrine, The New Yorker (Jan. 20, 2016). ^ Jonathan Stahl, Supreme Court rules on political speech and the First Amendment, National Constitution Center (Apr. 29, 2016). ^ S. M., Why freedom of speech might protect you when you aren't speaking, The Economist (Apr. 29, 2016). ^ Malinconico, Joe (October 19, 2016). "In a reversal, Paterson council OKs $1.6M settlement lawsuit that went to U.S. Supreme Court". North Jersey.com. Retrieved April 25, 2017.  v t e United States First Amendment case law Establishment Clause Public funding Everson v. Board of Education (1947) McCollum v. Board of Education (1948) Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York (1970) Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971) Tilton v. Richardson (1971) Committee for Public Education & Religious Liberty v. Nyquist (1973) Sloan v. Lemon (1973) Wolman v. Walter (1977) Marsh v. Chambers (1983) Mueller v. Allen (1983) Aguilar v. Felton (1985) Board of Education of Kiryas Joel Village School District v. Grumet (1994) Agostini v. Felton (1997) Mitchell v. Helms (2000) Zelman v. Simmons-Harris (2002) Locke v. Davey (2004) Arizona Christian School Tuition Organization v. Winn (2011) Public displays Stone v. Graham (1980) Lynch v. Donnelly (1984) Board of Trustees of Scarsdale v. McCreary (1985) County of Allegheny v. ACLU (1989) McCreary County v. ACLU of Kentucky (2005) Van Orden v. Perry (2005) Pleasant Grove City v. Summum (2009) School prayer Zorach v. Clauson (1952) Engel v. Vitale (1962) Abington School District v. Schempp (1963) Stone v. Graham (1980) Wallace v. Jaffree (1985) Lee v. Weisman (1992) Santa Fe Independent School District v. Doe (2000) Elk Grove Unified School District v. Newdow (2004) Creationism Epperson v. Arkansas (1968) Edwards v. Aguillard (1987) Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District (M.D. Pa. 2005) Legislature prayer Marsh v. Chambers (1983) Town of Greece v. Galloway (2014) Establishment Clause, Other McGowan v. Maryland (1961) Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York (1970) McDaniel v. Paty (1978) Widmar v. Vincent (1981) Larkin v. Grendel's Den, Inc. (1982) Estate of Thornton v. Caldor, Inc. (1985) Texas Monthly, Inc. v. Bullock (1989) Free Exercise Clause Vidal v. Girard's Executors (1844) Reynolds v. United States (1879) Davis v. Beason (1890) Schneider v. New Jersey (1939) Cantwell v. Connecticut (1940) Minersville School District v. Gobitis (1940) Murdock v. Pennsylvania (1943) United State v. Ballard (1944) Braunfeld v. Brown (1961) Torcaso v. Watkins (1961) Sherbert v. Verner (1963) Presbyterian Church v. Hull Church (1969) Wisconsin v. Yoder (1972) NLRB v. Catholic Bishop of Chicago (1979) Harris v. McRae (1980) Thomas v. Review Board of the Indiana Employment Security Division (1981) United States v. Lee (1982) Bob Jones University v. United States (1983) Bowen v. Roy (1986) Goldman v. Weinberger (1986) Employment Division v. Smith (1990) Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah (1993) City of Boerne v. Flores (1997) Watchtower Society v. Village of Stratton (2002) Cutter v. Wilkinson (2005) Gonzales v. UDV (2006) Freedom of speech (portal) Sedition and imminent danger Alien and Sedition Acts (1798) Masses Publishing Co. v. Patten (S.D.N.Y. 1917) Schenck v. United States (1919) Abrams v. United States (1919) Gitlow v. New York (1925) Whitney v. California (1927) Dennis v. United States (1951) Communist Party v. Subversive Activities Control Board (1955, 1961) Yates v. United States (1957) Bond v. Floyd (1966) Brandenburg v. Ohio (1969) False speech Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc. (1974) United States v. Alvarez (2012) Fighting words and the heckler's veto Cantwell v. Connecticut (1940) Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire (1942) Terminiello v. Chicago (1949) Feiner v. New York (1951) Gregory v. Chicago (1969) National Socialist Party of America v. Village of Skokie (1977) R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul (1992) Snyder v. Phelps (2011) Elonis v. United States (2015) Freedom of assembly and public forums Hague v. CIO (1939) Schneider v. New Jersey (1939) Martin v. Struthers (1943) Marsh v. Alabama (1946) Niemotko v. Maryland (1951) Edwards v. South Carolina (1963) Cox v. Louisiana (1965) Brown v. Louisiana (1966) Adderley v. Florida (1966) Carroll v. Town of Princess Anne (1968) Coates v. Cincinnati (1971) Organization for a Better Austin v. Keefe (1971) Lloyd Corp. v. Tanner (1972) Pruneyard Shopping Center v. Robins (1980) Widmar v. Vincent (1981) Hill v. Colorado (2000) McCullen v. Coakley (2014) Symbolic speech Stromberg v. California (1931) United States v. O'Brien (1968) Cohen v. California (1971) Smith v. Goguen (1974) Texas v. Johnson (1989) United States v. Eichman (1990) Virginia v. Black (2003) Compelled speech Minersville School District v. Gobitis (1940) West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette (1943) Wooley v. Maynard (1977) Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System v. Southworth (2000) Davenport v. Washington Education Association (2007) Knox v. Service Employees International Union, Local 1000 (2012) Agency for International Development v. Alliance for Open Society International, Inc. (2013) Loyalty oaths American Communications Association v. Douds (1950) Garner v. Board of Public Works (1951) Speiser v. Randall (1958) Keyishian v. Board of Regents (1965) Communist Party of Indiana v. Whitcomb (1974) School speech Minersville School District v. Gobitis (1940) West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette (1943) Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District (1969) Island Trees School District v. Pico (1982) Bethel School District v. Fraser (1986) Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier (1988) Rosenberger v. University of Virginia (1995) Morse v. Frederick (2007) Obscenity Rosen v. United States (1896) United States v. One Book Called Ulysses (S.D.N.Y. 1933) Roth v. United States (1957) One, Inc. v. Olesen (1958) Marcus v. Search Warrant (1961) MANual Enterprises v. Day (1962) Jacobellis v. Ohio (1964) Quantity of Books v. Kansas (1964) Freedman v. Maryland (1965) Memoirs v. Massachusetts (1966) Redrup v. New York (1967) Ginsberg v. New York (1968) Stanley v. Georgia (1969) Cohen v. California (1971) United States v. Thirty-seven Photographs (1971) Kois v. Wisconsin (1972) Miller v. California (1973) Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton (1973) United States v. 12 200-ft. Reels of Film (1973) Jenkins v. Georgia (1974) Erznoznik v. City of Jacksonville (1975) Young v. American Mini Theatres (1976) New York v. Ferber (1982) American Booksellers v. Hudnut (7th Cir., 1985) Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc. (1986) Osborne v. Ohio (1990) United States v. X-Citement Video (1994) Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union (1997) United States v. Playboy Entertainment Group (2000) Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition (2002) Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union (2002) Nitke v. Gonzales (S.D.N.Y., 2005) United States v. Williams (2008) FCC v. Fox Televisions Stations - 2 cases (2009 and 2012) American Booksellers Foundation for Free Expression v. Strickland (6th Cir., 2009) United States v. Kilbride (9th Cir., 2009) United States v. Stevens (2010) Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association (2011) Public employees Pickering v. Board of Education (1968) Perry v. Sindermann (1972) Board of Regents of State Colleges v. Roth (1972) Mt. Healthy City School District Board of Education v. Doyle (1977) Givhan v. Western Line Consolidated School District (1979) Connick v. Myers (1983) Rankin v. McPherson (1987) Waters v. Churchill (1994) Garcetti v. Ceballos (2006) Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri (2011) Heffernan v. City of Paterson (2016) Hatch Act and similar laws Ex parte Curtis (1882) United Public Workers v. Mitchell (1947) United States Civil Service Commission v. National Association of Letter Carriers (1973) Broadrick v. Oklahoma (1973) Licensing and restriction of speech Mutual Film Corporation v. Industrial Commission of Ohio (1915) Joseph Burstyn, Inc. v. Wilson (1952) Freedman v. Maryland (1965) Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council (1976) Hoffman Estates v. The Flipside, Hoffman Estates, Inc. (1982) Walker v. Texas Division, Sons of Confederate Veterans (2015) Commercial speech Valentine v. Chrestensen (1942) Rowan v. U.S. Post Office Dept. (1970) Pittsburgh Press Co. v. Pittsburgh Commission on Human Relations (1973) Bigelow v. Commonwealth of Virginia (1974) Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council (1976) Bates v. State Bar of Arizona (1977) Linmark Associates, Inc. v. Willingboro (1977) Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Ass’n (1978) Friedman v. Rogers (1979) Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission (1980) Consol. Edison Co. v. Public Serv. Comm'n (1980) Bolger v. Youngs Drug Products (1983) Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel (1985) Pacific Gas & Electric Co. v. Public Utilities Commission of California (1986) Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto Rico (1986) San Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic Committee (1987) 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island (1996) Sorrell v. IMS Health Inc. (2011) Campaign finance and political speech Buckley v. Valeo (1976) First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti (1978) Citizens Against Rent Control v. City of Berkeley (1981) California Medical Association v. FEC (1981) Brown v. Socialist Workers '74 Campaign Committee (1982) Regan v. Taxation with Representation of Washington (1983) FEC v. National Conservative Political Action Committee (1985) FEC v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life (1986) Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce (1990) McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Commission (1995) Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Committee v. FEC (1996) Nixon v. Shrink Missouri Government PAC (2000) FEC v. Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Committee (2001) Republican Party of Minnesota v. White (2002) McConnell v. FEC (2003) FEC v. Beaumont (2003) Randall v. Sorrell (2006) FEC v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc. (2007) Davis v. FEC (2008) Citizens United v. FEC (2010) McComish v. Bennett (2011) American Tradition Partnership v. Bullock (2012) McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission (2014) Williams-Yulee v. The Florida Bar (2015) Freedom of the press Prior restraints and censorship Near v. Minnesota (1931) Lovell v. City of Griffin (1938) Hannegan v. Esquire (1946) New York Times Co. v. United States (1971) Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo (1974) Nebraska Press Assn. v. Stuart (1976) Tory v. Cochran (2005) Privacy Time, Inc. v. Hill (1967) Cox Broadcasting Corp. v. Cohn (1975) Florida Star v. B. J. F. (1989) Taxation and privileges Grosjean v. American Press Co. (1936) Branzburg v. Hayes (1972) Minneapolis Star Tribune Company v. Commissioner (1983) Defamation Beauharnais v. Illinois (1952) New York Times Co. v. Sullivan (1964) Curtis Publishing Co. v. Butts (1967) Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc. (1974) Time, Inc. v. Firestone (1976) Bose Corp. v. Consumers Union of United States, Inc. (1984) Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc. (1985) McDonald v. Smith (1985) Hustler Magazine v. Falwell (1988) Harte-Hanks Communications v. Connaughton (1989) Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co. (1990) Obsidian Finance Group, LLC v. Cox (9th Cir., 2014) Broadcast media Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC (1969) FCC v. Pacifica Foundation (1978) Turner Broadcasting v. FCC (1994) Bartnicki v. Vopper (2001) Freedom of association Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee v. McGrath (1951) Watkins v. United States (1957) NAACP v. Alabama (1958) Baggett v. Bullitt (1964) In re Primus (1978) Roberts v. United States Jaycees (1984) Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, & Bisexual Group of Boston (1995) Boy Scouts of America v. Dale (2000) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Heffernan_v._City_of_Paterson&oldid=777385770" Categories: United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court United States First Amendment case law United States public employment case law 2016 in United States case law Hidden categories: Featured articles Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Add links This page was last modified on 26 April 2017, at 21:31. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page |||Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 5,393,689 articles in English Arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From today's featured article Stephen Breyer Heffernan v. City of Paterson was a U.S. Supreme Court case concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees, decided on April 26, 2016. Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey, police force, was seen with a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor. Heffernan's supervisors mistakenly thought that he was actively supporting the challenger and demoted him. He brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his right to free speech. Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer (pictured) cited the Court's precedents, which had held that it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not actually engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed but not that his constitutional rights had been violated. (Full article...) Recently featured: George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore "The Shape of Things to Come" (Lost) Shakespeare authorship question Archive By email More featured articles... Did you know... Unita Blackwell ... that civil rights activist Unita Blackwell (pictured) was the first African-American woman to be elected mayor in the state of Mississippi? ... that soldiers lined up on the sinking British troopship SS Tyndareus began to sing "It's a Long Way to Tipperary" while waiting for orders? ... that many reviewers compared the superhero comic Ultra to the television series Sex and the City? ... that the recently named fossil egg Suchoolithus dates to the Late Jurassic, making it tied for the oldest-known crocodylomorph egg? ... that the film The Brainwashing of My Dad received funding from Kickstarter? ... that the term elastance, the inverse of capacitance, was coined by Oliver Heaviside to promote an analogy of a capacitor as a spring rather than a container of charge? ... that "Christ ist erstanden", an old German hymn mentioned as early as the 12th century, was set for choir in the 21st century? ... that despite topping his class at Sandhurst, John Gellibrand found the prospects for promotion in the British Army so bleak that he resigned his commission and moved to Tasmania to grow apples? Recent additions Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru In the London Marathon, Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru (pictured) win the women's and men's races, respectively. A Taliban attack on an Afghan National Army base kills 140 soldiers. Turkey votes in a constitutional referendum in favour of replacing its parliamentary system of government with an executive presidency. A suicide bombing of civilian evacuation buses near Aleppo, Syria, kills more than 120 people, including at least 80 children. Emma Morano, the last known living person born before 1900, dies at the age of 117. Ongoing: Battle of Mosul Recent deaths: Erin Moran Michele Scarponi Ugo Ehiogu Aaron Hernandez On this day... April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries Today's featured picture The Storm is a painting by French artist Pierre Auguste Cot completed in 1880. Currently on display at New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art, it was commissioned by Catharine Lorillard Wolfe. Suggested inspirations have included the Greek romance Daphnis and Chloe by Longus as well as the romantic tale Paul et Virginie by Bernardin de Saint-Pierre. Painting: Pierre Auguste Cot Recently featured: Charolais bull Jesse B. Jackson Dynjandi Archive More featured pictures... Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning materials and activities Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 5,393,689 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=762066868" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Main Page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Languages ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Galego ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Român? ??????? Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? This page was last modified on 26 January 2017, at 12:39. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page#mw-head |||Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 5,393,689 articles in English Arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From today's featured article Stephen Breyer Heffernan v. City of Paterson was a U.S. Supreme Court case concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees, decided on April 26, 2016. Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey, police force, was seen with a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor. Heffernan's supervisors mistakenly thought that he was actively supporting the challenger and demoted him. He brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his right to free speech. Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer (pictured) cited the Court's precedents, which had held that it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not actually engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed but not that his constitutional rights had been violated. (Full article...) Recently featured: George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore "The Shape of Things to Come" (Lost) Shakespeare authorship question Archive By email More featured articles... Did you know... Unita Blackwell ... that civil rights activist Unita Blackwell (pictured) was the first African-American woman to be elected mayor in the state of Mississippi? ... that soldiers lined up on the sinking British troopship SS Tyndareus began to sing "It's a Long Way to Tipperary" while waiting for orders? ... that many reviewers compared the superhero comic Ultra to the television series Sex and the City? ... that the recently named fossil egg Suchoolithus dates to the Late Jurassic, making it tied for the oldest-known crocodylomorph egg? ... that the film The Brainwashing of My Dad received funding from Kickstarter? ... that the term elastance, the inverse of capacitance, was coined by Oliver Heaviside to promote an analogy of a capacitor as a spring rather than a container of charge? ... that "Christ ist erstanden", an old German hymn mentioned as early as the 12th century, was set for choir in the 21st century? ... that despite topping his class at Sandhurst, John Gellibrand found the prospects for promotion in the British Army so bleak that he resigned his commission and moved to Tasmania to grow apples? Recent additions Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru In the London Marathon, Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru (pictured) win the women's and men's races, respectively. A Taliban attack on an Afghan National Army base kills 140 soldiers. Turkey votes in a constitutional referendum in favour of replacing its parliamentary system of government with an executive presidency. A suicide bombing of civilian evacuation buses near Aleppo, Syria, kills more than 120 people, including at least 80 children. Emma Morano, the last known living person born before 1900, dies at the age of 117. Ongoing: Battle of Mosul Recent deaths: Erin Moran Michele Scarponi Ugo Ehiogu Aaron Hernandez On this day... April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries Today's featured picture The Storm is a painting by French artist Pierre Auguste Cot completed in 1880. Currently on display at New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art, it was commissioned by Catharine Lorillard Wolfe. Suggested inspirations have included the Greek romance Daphnis and Chloe by Longus as well as the romantic tale Paul et Virginie by Bernardin de Saint-Pierre. Painting: Pierre Auguste Cot Recently featured: Charolais bull Jesse B. Jackson Dynjandi Archive More featured pictures... Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning materials and activities Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 5,393,689 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=762066868" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Main Page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Languages ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Galego ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Român? ??????? Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? This page was last modified on 26 January 2017, at 12:39. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page#p-search |||Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 5,393,689 articles in English Arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From today's featured article Stephen Breyer Heffernan v. City of Paterson was a U.S. Supreme Court case concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees, decided on April 26, 2016. Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey, police force, was seen with a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor. Heffernan's supervisors mistakenly thought that he was actively supporting the challenger and demoted him. He brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his right to free speech. Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer (pictured) cited the Court's precedents, which had held that it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not actually engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed but not that his constitutional rights had been violated. (Full article...) Recently featured: George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore "The Shape of Things to Come" (Lost) Shakespeare authorship question Archive By email More featured articles... Did you know... Unita Blackwell ... that civil rights activist Unita Blackwell (pictured) was the first African-American woman to be elected mayor in the state of Mississippi? ... that soldiers lined up on the sinking British troopship SS Tyndareus began to sing "It's a Long Way to Tipperary" while waiting for orders? ... that many reviewers compared the superhero comic Ultra to the television series Sex and the City? ... that the recently named fossil egg Suchoolithus dates to the Late Jurassic, making it tied for the oldest-known crocodylomorph egg? ... that the film The Brainwashing of My Dad received funding from Kickstarter? ... that the term elastance, the inverse of capacitance, was coined by Oliver Heaviside to promote an analogy of a capacitor as a spring rather than a container of charge? ... that "Christ ist erstanden", an old German hymn mentioned as early as the 12th century, was set for choir in the 21st century? ... that despite topping his class at Sandhurst, John Gellibrand found the prospects for promotion in the British Army so bleak that he resigned his commission and moved to Tasmania to grow apples? Recent additions Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru In the London Marathon, Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru (pictured) win the women's and men's races, respectively. A Taliban attack on an Afghan National Army base kills 140 soldiers. Turkey votes in a constitutional referendum in favour of replacing its parliamentary system of government with an executive presidency. A suicide bombing of civilian evacuation buses near Aleppo, Syria, kills more than 120 people, including at least 80 children. Emma Morano, the last known living person born before 1900, dies at the age of 117. Ongoing: Battle of Mosul Recent deaths: Erin Moran Michele Scarponi Ugo Ehiogu Aaron Hernandez On this day... April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries Today's featured picture The Storm is a painting by French artist Pierre Auguste Cot completed in 1880. Currently on display at New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art, it was commissioned by Catharine Lorillard Wolfe. Suggested inspirations have included the Greek romance Daphnis and Chloe by Longus as well as the romantic tale Paul et Virginie by Bernardin de Saint-Pierre. Painting: Pierre Auguste Cot Recently featured: Charolais bull Jesse B. Jackson Dynjandi Archive More featured pictures... Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning materials and activities Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 5,393,689 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=762066868" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Main Page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Languages ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Galego ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Român? ??????? Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? This page was last modified on 26 January 2017, at 12:39. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia |||Wikipedia From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article is about the Internet encyclopedia. For Wikipedia's home page, see Wikipedia's Main Page. For Wikipedia's visitor introduction, see Wikipedia's About Page. For other uses, see Wikipedia (disambiguation). Wikipedia The logo of Wikipedia, a globe featuring glyphs from several writing systems[notes 1] Screenshot  Main Page of the English Wikipedia on April 6, 2017 Type of site Internet encyclopedia Available in 295 languages Owner Wikimedia Foundation Created by Jimmy Wales, Larry Sanger[1] Slogan(s) The free encyclopedia that anyone can edit Website wikipedia.org Alexa rank 5 (Global, April 2017[update]) Commercial No Registration Optional[notes 2] Users >312,808 active users[notes 3] and >67,527,543 registered users Launched January 15, 2001; 16 years ago (2001-01-15) Current status Active Content license CC Attribution / Share-Alike 3.0 Most text is also dual-licensed under GFDL; media licensing varies Written in LAMP platform[2] OCLC number 52075003 Wikipedia (i/?w?k??pi?di?/ or i/?w?ki?pi?di?/ WIK-i-PEE-dee-?) is a free online encyclopedia with the aim to allow anyone to edit articles.[3] Wikipedia is the largest and most popular general reference work on the Internet[4][5][6] and is ranked among the ten most popular websites.[7] Wikipedia is owned by the nonprofit Wikimedia Foundation.[8][9][10] Wikipedia was launched on January 15, 2001, by Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger.[11] Sanger coined its name,[12][13] a portmanteau of wiki[notes 4] and encyclopedia. There was only the English language version initially, but it quickly developed similar versions in other languages, which differ in content and in editing practices. With 5,393,611 articles,[notes 5] the English Wikipedia is the largest of the more than 290 Wikipedia encyclopedias. Overall, Wikipedia consists of more than 40 million articles in more than 250 different languages[15] and, as of February 2014[update], it had 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors each month.[16] As of March 2017, Wikipedia has about forty thousand high-quality articles known as Featured Articles and Good Articles that cover vital topics.[17][18] In 2005, Nature published a peer review comparing 42 science articles from Encyclopædia Britannica and Wikipedia, and found that Wikipedia's level of accuracy approached Encyclopædia Britannica's.[19] Criticism of Wikipedia includes claims that it exhibits systemic bias, presents a mixture of "truths, half truths, and some falsehoods",[20] and that, in controversial topics, it is subject to manipulation and spin.[21] Contents 1 History 1.1 Nupedia 1.2 Launch and early growth 1.3 Milestones 2 Openness 2.1 Restrictions 2.2 Review of changes 2.3 Vandalism 3 Policies and laws 3.1 Content policies and guidelines 4 Governance 4.1 Administrators 4.2 Dispute resolution 4.2.1 Arbitration Committee 5 Community 5.1 Diversity 6 Language editions 7 Critical reception 7.1 Accuracy of content 7.1.1 Medical information 7.2 Quality of writing 7.3 Coverage of topics and systemic bias 7.3.1 Coverage of topics and selection bias 7.3.2 Systemic bias 7.3.3 Identifying the filter-bubble problem 7.4 Explicit content 7.5 Privacy 7.6 Sexism 8 Operation 8.1 Wikimedia Foundation and Wikimedia movement affiliates 8.2 Software operations and support 8.3 Automated editing 8.4 Wikiprojects, and assessments of articles' importance and quality 8.5 Hardware operations and support 8.6 Internal research and operational development 8.7 Internal news publications 9 Access to content 9.1 Content licensing 9.2 Methods of access 9.2.1 Mobile access 10 Cultural impact 10.1 Readership 10.2 Cultural significance 10.2.1 Awards 10.2.2 Satire 10.3 Sister projects – Wikimedia 10.4 Publishing 10.5 Scientific use 11 Related projects 12 See also 13 References 13.1 Notes 14 Further reading 14.1 Academic studies 14.2 Books 14.3 Book reviews and other articles 14.3.1 Learning resources 14.3.2 Other media coverage 15 External links History Main article: History of Wikipedia Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger Nupedia Wikipedia originally developed from another encyclopedia project called Nupedia Other collaborative online encyclopedias were attempted before Wikipedia, but none were so successful.[22] Wikipedia began as a complementary project for Nupedia, a free online English-language encyclopedia project whose articles were written by experts and reviewed under a formal process.[11] Nupedia was founded on March 9, 2000, under the ownership of Bomis, a web portal company. Its main figures were Jimmy Wales, the CEO of Bomis, and Larry Sanger, editor-in-chief for Nupedia and later Wikipedia. Nupedia was licensed initially under its own Nupedia Open Content License, switching to the GNU Free Documentation License before Wikipedia's founding at the urging of Richard Stallman.[23] Sanger and Wales founded Wikipedia.[24][25] While Wales is credited with defining the goal of making a publicly editable encyclopedia,[26][27] Sanger is credited with the strategy of using a wiki to reach that goal.[28] On January 10, 2001, Sanger proposed on the Nupedia mailing list to create a wiki as a "feeder" project for Nupedia.[29] Play media Wikipedia according to Simpleshow External audio The Great Book of Knowledge, Part 1, Ideas with Paul Kennedy, CBC, January 15, 2014 Launch and early growth Wikipedia was launched on January 15, 2001, as a single English-language edition at www.wikipedia.com,[30] and announced by Sanger on the Nupedia mailing list.[26] Wikipedia's policy of "neutral point-of-view"[31] was codified in its first months. Otherwise, there were relatively few rules initially and Wikipedia operated independently of Nupedia.[26] Originally, Bomis intended to make Wikipedia a business for profit.[32] Wikipedia gained early contributors from Nupedia, Slashdot postings, and web search engine indexing. By August 8, 2001, Wikipedia had over 8,000 articles.[33] On September 25, 2001, Wikipedia had over 13,000 articles.[34] By the end of 2001, it had grown to approximately 20,000 articles and 18 language editions. It had reached 26 language editions by late 2002, 46 by the end of 2003, and 161 by the final days of 2004.[35] Nupedia and Wikipedia coexisted until the former's servers were taken down permanently in 2003, and its text was incorporated into Wikipedia. The English Wikipedia passed the mark of two million articles on September 9, 2007, making it the largest encyclopedia ever assembled, surpassing even the 1408 Yongle Encyclopedia, which had held the record for almost 600 years.[36] Citing fears of commercial advertising and lack of control in Wikipedia, users of the Spanish Wikipedia forked from Wikipedia to create the Enciclopedia Libre in February 2002.[37] These moves encouraged Wales to announce that Wikipedia would not display advertisements, and to change Wikipedia's domain from wikipedia.com to wikipedia.org.[38] Though the English Wikipedia reached three million articles in August 2009, the growth of the edition, in terms of the numbers of articles and of contributors, appears to have peaked around early 2007.[39] Around 1,800 articles were added daily to the encyclopedia in 2006; by 2013 that average was roughly 800.[40] A team at the Palo Alto Research Center attributed this slowing of growth to the project's increasing exclusivity and resistance to change.[41] Others suggest that the growth is flattening naturally because articles that could be called "low-hanging fruit"—topics that clearly merit an article—have already been created and built up extensively.[42][43][44] In November 2009, a researcher at the Rey Juan Carlos University in Madrid (Spain) found that the English Wikipedia had lost 49,000 editors during the first three months of 2009; in comparison, the project lost only 4,900 editors during the same period in 2008.[45][46] The Wall Street Journal cited the array of rules applied to editing and disputes related to such content among the reasons for this trend.[47] Wales disputed these claims in 2009, denying the decline and questioning the methodology of the study.[48] Two years later, in 2011, Wales acknowledged the presence of a slight decline, noting a decrease from "a little more than 36,000 writers" in June 2010 to 35,800 in June 2011. In the same interview, Wales also claimed the number of editors was "stable and sustainable".[49] A 2013 article titled "The Decline of Wikipedia" in MIT's Technology Review questioned this claim. The article revealed that since 2007, Wikipedia had lost a third of the volunteer editors who update and correct the online encyclopedia and those still there have focused increasingly on minutiae.[50] In July 2012, the Atlantic reported that the number of administrators is also in decline.[51] In the November 25, 2013, issue of New York magazine, Katherine Ward stated "Wikipedia, the sixth-most-used website, is facing an internal crisis".[52] Wikipedia blackout protest against SOPA on January 18, 2012 Play media A promotional video of the Wikimedia Foundation that encourages viewers to edit Wikipedia, mostly reviewing 2014 via Wikipedia content Milestones In January 2007, Wikipedia entered for the first time the top-ten list of the most popular websites in the U.S., according to comScore Networks. With 42.9 million unique visitors, Wikipedia was ranked number 9, surpassing the New York Times (#10) and Apple (#11). This marked a significant increase over January 2006, when the rank was number 33, with Wikipedia receiving around 18.3 million unique visitors.[53] As of March 2015[update], Wikipedia has rank 5[7][54] among websites in terms of popularity according to Alexa Internet. In 2014, it received 8 billion pageviews every month.[55] On February 9, 2014, The New York Times reported that Wikipedia has 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors a month, "according to the ratings firm comScore."[16] On January 18, 2012, the English Wikipedia participated in a series of coordinated protests against two proposed laws in the United States Congress—the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA) and the PROTECT IP Act (PIPA)—by blacking out its pages for 24 hours.[56] More than 162 million people viewed the blackout explanation page that temporarily replaced Wikipedia content.[57][58] Loveland and Reagle argue that, in process, Wikipedia follows a long tradition of historical encyclopedias that accumulated improvements piecemeal through "stigmergic accumulation".[59][60] On January 20, 2014, Subodh Varma reporting for The Economic Times indicated that not only had Wikipedia's growth flattened but that it has "lost nearly 10 per cent of its page-views last year. That's a decline of about 2 billion between December 2012 and December 2013. Its most popular versions are leading the slide: page-views of the English Wikipedia declined by 12 per cent, those of German version slid by 17 per cent and the Japanese version lost 9 per cent."[61] Varma added that, "While Wikipedia's managers think that this could be due to errors in counting, other experts feel that Google's Knowledge Graphs project launched last year may be gobbling up Wikipedia users."[61] When contacted on this matter, Clay Shirky, associate professor at New York University and fellow at Harvard's Berkman Center for Internet and Security indicated that he suspected much of the page view decline was due to Knowledge Graphs, stating, "If you can get your question answered from the search page, you don't need to click [any further]."[61] By the end of December 2016, Wikipedia was ranked fifth in the most popular websites globally.[62] Number of Wikipedia articles[63] Wikipedia editors with >100 edits per month[63] Openness Differences between versions of an article are highlighted as shown Unlike traditional encyclopedias, Wikipedia follows the procrastination principle[notes 6][64] regarding the security of its content.[64] It started almost entirely open—anyone could create articles, and any Wikipedia article could be edited by any reader, even those who did not have a Wikipedia account. Modifications to all articles would be published immediately. As a result, any article could contain inaccuracies such as errors, ideological biases, and nonsensical or irrelevant text. Restrictions Due to the increasing popularity of Wikipedia, popular editions, including the English version, have introduced editing restrictions in some cases. For instance, on the English Wikipedia and some other language editions, only registered users may create a new article.[65] On the English Wikipedia, among others, some particularly controversial, sensitive and/or vandalism-prone pages have been protected to some degree.[66][67] A frequently vandalized article can be semi-protected or extended confirmed protected, meaning that only autoconfirmed or extended confirmed editors are able to modify it.[68] A particularly contentious article may be locked so that only administrators are able to make changes.[69] In certain cases, all editors are allowed to submit modifications, but review is required for some editors, depending on certain conditions. For example, the German Wikipedia maintains "stable versions" of articles,[70] which have passed certain reviews. Following protracted trials and community discussion, the English Wikipedia introduced the "pending changes" system in December 2012.[71] Under this system, new and unregistered users' edits to certain controversial or vandalism-prone articles are reviewed by established users before they are published.[72] The editing interface of Wikipedia Review of changes Although changes are not systematically reviewed, the software that powers Wikipedia provides certain tools allowing anyone to review changes made by others. The "History" page of each article links to each revision.[notes 7][73] On most articles, anyone can undo others' changes by clicking a link on the article's history page. Anyone can view the latest changes to articles, and anyone may maintain a "watchlist" of articles that interest them so they can be notified of any changes. "New pages patrol" is a process whereby newly created articles are checked for obvious problems.[74] In 2003, economics PhD student Andrea Ciffolilli argued that the low transaction costs of participating in a wiki create a catalyst for collaborative development, and that features such as allowing easy access to past versions of a page favor "creative construction" over "creative destruction".[75] Vandalism Main article: Vandalism on Wikipedia Any change or edit that manipulates content in a way that purposefully compromises the integrity of Wikipedia is considered vandalism. The most common and obvious types of vandalism include additions of obscenities and crude humor. Vandalism can also include advertising and other types of spam.[76] Sometimes editors commit vandalism by removing content or entirely blanking a given page. Less common types of vandalism, such as the deliberate addition of plausible but false information to an article, can be more difficult to detect. Vandals can introduce irrelevant formatting, modify page semantics such as the page's title or categorization, manipulate the underlying code of an article, or use images disruptively.[77] American journalist John Seigenthaler (1927–2014), subject of the Seigenthaler incident Obvious vandalism is generally easy to remove from Wikipedia articles; the median time to detect and fix vandalism is a few minutes.[78][79] However, some vandalism takes much longer to repair.[80] In the Seigenthaler biography incident, an anonymous editor introduced false information into the biography of American political figure John Seigenthaler in May 2005. Seigenthaler was falsely presented as a suspect in the assassination of John F. Kennedy.[80] The article remained uncorrected for four months.[80] Seigenthaler, the founding editorial director of USA Today and founder of the Freedom Forum First Amendment Center at Vanderbilt University, called Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales and asked whether he had any way of knowing who contributed the misinformation. Wales replied that he did not, although the perpetrator was eventually traced.[81][82] After the incident, Seigenthaler described Wikipedia as "a flawed and irresponsible research tool".[80] This incident led to policy changes at Wikipedia, specifically targeted at tightening up the verifiability of biographical articles of living people.[83] Policies and laws See also: Wikipedia:Five Pillars External video Wikimania, 60 Minutes, CBS, 20 minutes, April 5, 2015, co-founder Jimmy Wales at Fosdem Content in Wikipedia is subject to the laws (in particular, copyright laws) of the United States and of the U.S. state of Virginia, where the majority of Wikipedia's servers are located. Beyond legal matters, the editorial principles of Wikipedia are embodied in the "five pillars" and in numerous policies and guidelines intended to appropriately shape content. Even these rules are stored in wiki form, and Wikipedia editors write and revise the website's policies and guidelines.[84] Editors can enforce these rules by deleting or modifying non-compliant material. Originally, rules on the non-English editions of Wikipedia were based on a translation of the rules for the English Wikipedia. They have since diverged to some extent.[70] Content policies and guidelines According to the rules on the English Wikipedia, each entry in Wikipedia must be about a topic that is encyclopedic and is not a dictionary entry or dictionary-like.[85] A topic should also meet Wikipedia's standards of "notability",[86] which generally means that the topic must have been covered in mainstream media or major academic journal sources that are independent of the article's subject. Further, Wikipedia intends to convey only knowledge that is already established and recognized.[87] It must not present original research. A claim that is likely to be challenged requires a reference to a reliable source. Among Wikipedia editors, this is often phrased as "verifiability, not truth" to express the idea that the readers, not the encyclopedia, are ultimately responsible for checking the truthfulness of the articles and making their own interpretations.[88] This can at times lead to the removal of information that is valid.[89] Finally, Wikipedia must not take sides.[90] All opinions and viewpoints, if attributable to external sources, must enjoy an appropriate share of coverage within an article.[91] This is known as neutral point of view (NPOV). Governance Further information: Wikipedia:Administration Wikipedia's initial anarchy integrated democratic and hierarchical elements over time.[92][93] An article is not considered to be owned by its creator or any other editor and is not vetted by any recognized authority.[94] Wikipedia's contributors avoid a tragedy of the commons by internalizing benefits. They do this by experiencing flow and identifying with and gaining status in the Wikipedia community.[95] Administrators Editors in good standing in the community can run for one of many levels of volunteer stewardship: this begins with "administrator",[96][97] privileged users who can delete pages, prevent articles from being changed in case of vandalism or editorial disputes, and try to prevent certain persons from editing. Despite the name, administrators are not supposed to enjoy any special privilege in decision-making; instead, their powers are mostly limited to making edits that have project-wide effects and thus are disallowed to ordinary editors, and to implement restrictions intended to prevent certain persons from making disruptive edits (such as vandalism).[98][99] Fewer editors become administrators than in years past, in part because the process of vetting potential Wikipedia administrators has become more rigorous.[100] Bureaucrats name new administrators, solely upon the recommendations from the community. Dispute resolution Wikipedians often have disputes regarding content, which may result in repeatedly making opposite changes to an article, known as edit warring[101][102] Over time, Wikipedia has developed a semi-formal dispute resolution process to assist in such circumstances. In order to determine community consensus, editors can raise issues at appropriate community forums,[notes 8] or seek outside input through third opinion requests or by initiating a more general community discussion known as a request for comment. Arbitration Committee Main article: Arbitration Committee The Arbitration Committee presides over the ultimate dispute resolution process. Although disputes usually arise from a disagreement between two opposing views on how an article should read, the Arbitration Committee explicitly refuses to directly rule on the specific view that should be adopted. Statistical analyses suggest that the committee ignores the content of disputes and rather focuses on the way disputes are conducted,[103] functioning not so much to resolve disputes and make peace between conflicting editors, but to weed out problematic editors while allowing potentially productive editors back in to participate. Therefore, the committee does not dictate the content of articles, although it sometimes condemns content changes when it deems the new content violates Wikipedia policies (for example, if the new content is considered biased). Its remedies include cautions and probations (used in 63% of cases) and banning editors from articles (43%), subject matters (23%) or Wikipedia (16%). Complete bans from Wikipedia are generally limited to instances of impersonation and anti-social behavior. When conduct is not impersonation or anti-social, but rather anti-consensus or in violation of editing policies, remedies tend to be limited to warnings.[104] Community Main article: Wikipedia community Play media Video of Wikimania 2005 – an annual conference for users of Wikipedia and other projects operated by the Wikimedia Foundation, was held in Frankfurt am Main, Germany from August 4 to 8. Each article and each user of Wikipedia has an associated "Talk" page. These form the primary communication channel for editors to discuss, coordinate and debate.[105] Play media Wikipedians and British Museum curators collaborate on the article Hoxne Hoard in June 2010 Wikipedia's community has been described as cult-like,[106] although not always with entirely negative connotations.[107] The project's preference for cohesiveness, even if it requires compromise that includes disregard of credentials, has been referred to as "anti-elitism".[108] Wikipedians sometimes award one another virtual barnstars for good work. These personalized tokens of appreciation reveal a wide range of valued work extending far beyond simple editing to include social support, administrative actions, and types of articulation work.[109] Wikipedia does not require that its editors and contributors provide identification.[110] As Wikipedia grew, "Who writes Wikipedia?" became one of the questions frequently asked on the project.[111] Jimmy Wales once argued that only "a community ... a dedicated group of a few hundred volunteers" makes the bulk of contributions to Wikipedia and that the project is therefore "much like any traditional organization".[112] In 2008, a Slate magazine article reported that: "According to researchers in Palo Alto, 1 percent of Wikipedia users are responsible for about half of the site's edits."[113] This method of evaluating contributions was later disputed by Aaron Swartz, who noted that several articles he sampled had large portions of their content (measured by number of characters) contributed by users with low edit counts.[114] The English Wikipedia has 5,393,611 articles, 30,795,277 registered editors, and 135,691 active editors. An editor is considered active if they have made one or more edits in the past thirty days. Editors who fail to comply with Wikipedia cultural rituals, such as signing talk page comments, may implicitly signal that they are Wikipedia outsiders, increasing the odds that Wikipedia insiders may target or discount their contributions. Becoming a Wikipedia insider involves non-trivial costs: the contributor is expected to learn Wikipedia-specific technological codes, submit to a sometimes convoluted dispute resolution process, and learn a "baffling culture rich with in-jokes and insider references".[115] Editors who do not log in are in some sense second-class citizens on Wikipedia,[115] as "participants are accredited by members of the wiki community, who have a vested interest in preserving the quality of the work product, on the basis of their ongoing participation",[116] but the contribution histories of anonymous unregistered editors recognized only by their IP addresses cannot be attributed to a particular editor with certainty. A 2007 study by researchers from Dartmouth College found that "anonymous and infrequent contributors to Wikipedia […] are as reliable a source of knowledge as those contributors who register with the site".[117] Jimmy Wales stated in 2009 that "(I)t turns out over 50% of all the edits are done by just .7% of the users... 524 people... And in fact the most active 2%, which is 1400 people, have done 73.4% of all the edits."[112] However, Business Insider editor and journalist Henry Blodget showed in 2009 that in a random sample of articles, most content in Wikipedia (measured by the amount of contributed text that survives to the latest sampled edit) is created by "outsiders", while most editing and formatting is done by "insiders".[112] A 2008 study found that Wikipedians were less agreeable, open, and conscientious than others,[118][119] although a later commentary pointed out serious flaws, including that the data showed higher openness, that the differences with the control group were small as were the samples.[120] According to a 2009 study, there is "evidence of growing resistance from the Wikipedia community to new content".[121] Diversity Wikipedia editor demographics (2008) One study found that the contributor base to Wikipedia "was barely 13% women; the average age of a contributor was in the mid-20s".[122] A 2011 study by researchers from the University of Minnesota found that females comprised 16.1% of the 38,497 editors who started editing Wikipedia during 2009.[123] In a January 2011 New York Times article, Noam Cohen observed that just 13% of Wikipedia's contributors are female according to a 2008 Wikimedia Foundation survey.[124] Sue Gardner, a former executive director of the Wikimedia Foundation, hoped to see female contributions increase to 25% by 2015.[125] Linda Basch, president of the National Council for Research on Women, noted the contrast in these Wikipedia editor statistics with the percentage of women currently completing bachelor's degrees, master's degrees and PhD programs in the United States (all at rates of 50 percent or greater).[126] In response, various universities have hosted edit-a-thons to encourage more women to participate in the Wikipedia community. In fall 2013, 15 colleges and universities — including Yale, Brown, and Pennsylvania State — offered college credit for students to "write feminist thinking" about technology into Wikipedia.[127] Estimates of the diversity of contributors by educational level have indicated that sixty-two percent of Wikipedia's editors are at the high school and undergraduate college level of education.[128] In August 2014, Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales said in a BBC interview that the Wikimedia Foundation was "... really doubling down our efforts ..." to reach 25% of female editors (originally targeted by 2015), since the Foundation had "totally failed" so far. Wales said "a lot of things need to happen ... a lot of outreach, a lot of software changes".[129] Andrew Lih, writing in The New York Times, was quoted by Bloomberg News in December 2016 as supporting Wales comments concerning shortfalls in Wikipedia's outreach to female editors. Lih states his concern with the question indicating that: "How can you get people to participate in an (editing) environment that feels unsafe, where identifying yourself as a woman, as a feminist, could open you up to ugly, intimidating behavior".[130] Language editions There are currently 295 language editions of Wikipedia (also called language versions, or simply Wikipedias). Thirteen of these have over one million articles each (English, Swedish, Cebuano, German, Dutch, French, Russian, Italian, Spanish, Waray-Waray, Polish, Vietnamese and Japanese), five more have over 500,000 articles (Portuguese, Chinese, Ukrainian, Catalan and Persian), 40 more have over 100,000 articles, and 77 more have over 10,000 articles.[131][132] The largest, the English Wikipedia, has over 5.3 million articles. As of January 2017[update], according to Alexa, the English subdomain (en.wikipedia.org; English Wikipedia) receives approximately 55% of Wikipedia's cumulative traffic, with the remaining split among the other languages (Russian: 9%; Japanese: 7%; Spanish: 6%; French: 4%).[7] As of April 2017, the six largest language editions are (in order of article count) the English, Cebuano, Swedish, German, Dutch, and French Wikipedias.[133] Distribution of the 44,160,825 articles in different language editions (as of 26 April 2017)[134]   English (12.2%)   Cebuano (9.4%)   Swedish (8.6%)   German (4.6%)   Dutch (4.3%)   French (4.2%)   Russian (3.1%)   Italian (3%)   Spanish (3%)   Waray (2.9%)   Polish (2.8%)   Vietnamese (2.6%)   Japanese (2.4%)   Portuguese (2.2%)   Other (34.7%) Logarithmic graph of the 20 largest language editions of Wikipedia (as of 26 April 2017)[135] (millions of articles) 0.1 0.3 1 3 English 5,393,611 Cebuano 4,138,135 Swedish 3,785,049 German 2,048,714 Dutch 1,897,908 French 1,858,259 Russian 1,384,908 Italian 1,346,331 Spanish 1,327,066 Waray 1,262,379 Polish 1,215,642 Vietnamese 1,155,136 Japanese 1,055,534 Portuguese 964,262 Chinese 934,268 Ukrainian 688,922 Catalan 538,744 Persian 526,845 Arabic 513,311 Norwegian 464,789 The unit for the numbers in bars is articles. Since Wikipedia is based on the Web and therefore worldwide, contributors to the same language edition may use different dialects or may come from different countries (as is the case for the English edition). These differences may lead to some conflicts over spelling differences (e.g. colour versus color)[136] or points of view.[137] Though the various language editions are held to global policies such as "neutral point of view", they diverge on some points of policy and practice, most notably on whether images that are not licensed freely may be used under a claim of fair use.[138][139][140] Jimmy Wales has described Wikipedia as "an effort to create and distribute a free encyclopedia of the highest possible quality to every single person on the planet in their own language".[141] Though each language edition functions more or less independently, some efforts are made to supervise them all. They are coordinated in part by Meta-Wiki, the Wikimedia Foundation's wiki devoted to maintaining all of its projects (Wikipedia and others).[142] For instance, Meta-Wiki provides important statistics on all language editions of Wikipedia,[143] and it maintains a list of articles every Wikipedia should have.[144] The list concerns basic content by subject: biography, history, geography, society, culture, science, technology, and mathematics. As for the rest, it is not rare for articles strongly related to a particular language not to have counterparts in another edition. For example, articles about small towns in the United States might only be available in English, even when they meet notability criteria of other language Wikipedia projects. Estimation of contributions shares from different regions in the world to different Wikipedia editions Translated articles represent only a small portion of articles in most editions, in part because fully automated translation of articles is disallowed.[145] Articles available in more than one language may offer "interwiki links", which link to the counterpart articles in other editions. A study published by PLOS ONE in 2012 also estimated the share of contributions to different editions of Wikipedia from different regions of the world. It reported that the proportion of the edits made from North America was 51% for the English Wikipedia, and 25% for the simple English Wikipedia.[146] The Wikimedia Foundation hopes to increase the number of editors in the Global South to thirty-seven percent by 2015.[147] On March 1, 2014, The Economist in an article titled "The Future of Wikipedia" cited a trend analysis concerning data published by Wikimedia stating that: "The number of editors for the English-language version has fallen by a third in seven years."[148] The attrition rate for active editors in English Wikipedia was cited by The Economist as substantially in contrast to statistics for Wikipedia in other languages (non-English Wikipedia). The Economist reported that the number of contributors with an average of five of more edits per month was relatively constant since 2008 for Wikipedia in other languages at approximately 42,000 editors within narrow seasonal variances of about 2,000 editors up or down. The attrition rates for editors in English Wikipedia, by sharp comparison, were cited as peaking in 2007 at approximately 50,000 editors which has dropped to 30,000 editors as of the start of 2014. At the quoted trend rate, the number of active editors in English Wikipedia has lost approximately 20,000 editors to attrition since 2007, and the documented trend rate indicates the loss of another 20,000 editors by 2021, down to 10,000 active editors on English Wikipedia by 2021 if left unabated.[148] Given that the trend analysis published in The Economist presents the number of active editors for Wikipedia in other languages (non-English Wikipedia) as remaining relatively constant and successful in sustaining its numbers at approximately 42,000 active editors, the contrast has pointed to the effectiveness of Wikipedia in other languages to retain its active editors on a renewable and sustained basis.[148] No comment was made concerning which of the differentiated edit policy standards from Wikipedia in other languages (non-English Wikipedia) would provide a possible alternative to English Wikipedia for effectively ameliorating substantial editor attrition rates on the English language Wikipedia.[149] Critical reception See also: Academic studies about Wikipedia and Criticism of Wikipedia Several Wikipedians have criticized Wikipedia's large and growing regulation, which includes over 50 policies and nearly 150,000 words as of 2014[update].[150][151] Critics have stated that Wikipedia exhibits systemic bias. Columnist and journalist Edwin Black criticizes Wikipedia for being a mixture of "truth, half truth, and some falsehoods".[20] Articles in The Chronicle of Higher Education and The Journal of Academic Librarianship have criticized Wikipedia's Undue Weight policy, concluding that the fact that Wikipedia explicitly is not designed to provide correct information about a subject, but rather focus on all the major viewpoints on the subject and give less attention to minor ones, creates omissions that can lead to false beliefs based on incomplete information.[152][153][154] Journalists Oliver Kamm and Edwin Black noted how articles are dominated by the loudest and most persistent voices, usually by a group with an "ax to grind" on the topic.[20][155] An article in Education Next Journal concluded that as a resource about controversial topics, Wikipedia is notoriously subject to manipulation and spin.[21] In 2006, the Wikipedia Watch criticism website listed dozens of examples of plagiarism in the English Wikipedia.[156] Accuracy of content Main article: Reliability of Wikipedia Articles for traditional encyclopedias such as Encyclopædia Britannica are carefully and deliberately written by experts, lending such encyclopedias a reputation for accuracy.[157] Conversely, Wikipedia is often cited for factual inaccuracies and misrepresentations. However, a peer review in 2005 of forty-two scientific entries on both Wikipedia and Encyclopædia Britannica by the science journal Nature found few differences in accuracy, and concluded that "the average science entry in Wikipedia contained around four inaccuracies; Britannica, about three."[19] Reagle suggested that while the study reflects "a topical strength of Wikipedia contributors" in science articles, "Wikipedia may not have fared so well using a random sampling of articles or on humanities subjects."[158] The findings by Nature were disputed by Encyclopædia Britannica,[159][160] and in response, Nature gave a rebuttal of the points raised by Britannica.[161] In addition to the point-for-point disagreement between these two parties, others have examined the sample size and selection method used in the Nature effort, and suggested a "flawed study design" (in Nature's manual selection of articles, in part or in whole, for comparison), absence of statistical analysis (e.g., of reported confidence intervals), and a lack of study "statistical power" (i.e., owing to small sample size, 42 or 4 x 101 articles compared, vs >105 and >106 set sizes for Britannica and the English Wikipedia, respectively).[162] As a consequence of the open structure, Wikipedia "makes no guarantee of validity" of its content, since no one is ultimately responsible for any claims appearing in it.[163] Concerns have been raised by PC World in 2009 regarding the lack of accountability that results from users' anonymity,[164] the insertion of false information,[165] vandalism, and similar problems. Economist Tyler Cowen wrote: "If I had to guess whether Wikipedia or the median refereed journal article on economics was more likely to be true, after a not so long think I would opt for Wikipedia." He comments that some traditional sources of non-fiction suffer from systemic biases and novel results, in his opinion, are over-reported in journal articles and relevant information is omitted from news reports. However, he also cautions that errors are frequently found on Internet sites, and that academics and experts must be vigilant in correcting them.[166] Critics argue that Wikipedia's open nature and a lack of proper sources for most of the information makes it unreliable.[167] Some commentators suggest that Wikipedia may be reliable, but that the reliability of any given article is not clear.[168] Editors of traditional reference works such as the Encyclopædia Britannica have questioned the project's utility and status as an encyclopedia.[169] External video Inside Wikipedia – Attack of the PR Industry, Deutsche Welle, 7:13 mins[170] Wikipedia's open structure inherently makes it an easy target for Internet trolls, spammers, and various forms of paid advocacy seen as counterproductive to the maintenance of a neutral and verifiable online encyclopedia.[73][171] In response to paid advocacy editing and undisclosed editing issues, Wikipedia was reported in an article by Jeff Elder in The Wall Street Journal on June 16, 2014, to have strengthened its rules and laws against undisclosed editing.[172] The article stated that: "Beginning Monday [from date of article], changes in Wikipedia's terms of use will require anyone paid to edit articles to disclose that arrangement. Katherine Maher, the nonprofit Wikimedia Foundation's chief communications officer, said the changes address a sentiment among volunteer editors that, 'we're not an advertising service; we're an encyclopedia.'"[172][173][174][175][176] These issues, among others, had been parodied since the first decade of Wikipedia, notably by Stephen Colbert on The Colbert Report.[177] Most university lecturers discourage students from citing any encyclopedia in academic work, preferring primary sources;[178] some specifically prohibit Wikipedia citations.[179][180] Wales stresses that encyclopedias of any type are not usually appropriate to use as citeable sources, and should not be relied upon as authoritative.[181] Wales once (2006 or earlier) said he receives about ten emails weekly from students saying they got failing grades on papers because they cited Wikipedia; he told the students they got what they deserved. "For God's sake, you're in college; don't cite the encyclopedia", he said.[182] In February 2007, an article in The Harvard Crimson newspaper reported that a few of the professors at Harvard University were including Wikipedia articles in their syllabi, although without realizing the articles might change.[183] In June 2007, former president of the American Library Association Michael Gorman condemned Wikipedia, along with Google,[184] stating that academics who endorse the use of Wikipedia are "the intellectual equivalent of a dietitian who recommends a steady diet of Big Macs with everything". A Harvard law textbook, Legal Research in a Nutshell (2011), cites Wikipedia as a "general source" that "can be a real boon" in "coming up to speed in the law governing a situation" and, "while not authoritative, can provide basic facts as well as leads to more in-depth resources".[185] Medical information See also: Health information on Wikipedia On March 5, 2014, Julie Beck writing for The Atlantic magazine in an article titled "Doctors' #1 Source for Healthcare Information: Wikipedia", stated that "Fifty percent of physicians look up conditions on the (Wikipedia) site, and some are editing articles themselves to improve the quality of available information."[186] Beck continued to detail in this article new programs of Dr. Amin Azzam at the University of San Francisco to offer medical school courses to medical students for learning to edit and improve Wikipedia articles on health-related issues, as well as internal quality control programs within Wikipedia organized by Dr. James Heilman to improve a group of 200 health-related articles of central medical importance up to Wikipedia's highest standard of articles using its Featured Article and Good Article peer review evaluation process.[186] In a May 7, 2014, follow-up article in The Atlantic titled "Can Wikipedia Ever Be a Definitive Medical Text?", Julie Beck quotes Wikiproject Medicine's Dr. James Heilman as stating: "Just because a reference is peer-reviewed doesn't mean it's a high-quality reference."[187] Beck added that: "Wikipedia has its own peer review process before articles can be classified as 'good' or 'featured.' Heilman, who has participated in that process before, says 'less than 1 percent' of Wikipedia's medical articles have passed.[187] Quality of writing In 2008, researchers at Carnegie Mellon University found that the quality of a Wikipedia article would suffer rather than gain from adding more writers when the article lacked appropriate explicit or implicit coordination.[188] For instance, when contributors rewrite small portions of an entry rather than making full-length revisions, high- and low-quality content may be intermingled within an entry. Roy Rosenzweig, a history professor, stated that American National Biography Online outperformed Wikipedia in terms of its "clear and engaging prose", which, he said, was an important aspect of good historical writing.[189] Contrasting Wikipedia's treatment of Abraham Lincoln to that of Civil War historian James McPherson in American National Biography Online, he said that both were essentially accurate and covered the major episodes in Lincoln's life, but praised "McPherson's richer contextualization […] his artful use of quotations to capture Lincoln's voice […] and […] his ability to convey a profound message in a handful of words." By contrast, he gives an example of Wikipedia's prose that he finds "both verbose and dull". Rosenzweig also criticized the "waffling—encouraged by the NPOV policy—[which] means that it is hard to discern any overall interpretive stance in Wikipedia history". By example, he quoted the conclusion of Wikipedia's article on William Clarke Quantrill. While generally praising the article, he pointed out its "waffling" conclusion: "Some historians […] remember him as an opportunistic, bloodthirsty outlaw, while others continue to view him as a daring soldier and local folk hero."[189] Other critics have made similar charges that, even if Wikipedia articles are factually accurate, they are often written in a poor, almost unreadable style. Frequent Wikipedia critic Andrew Orlowski commented: "Even when a Wikipedia entry is 100 per cent factually correct, and those facts have been carefully chosen, it all too often reads as if it has been translated from one language to another then into to a third, passing an illiterate translator at each stage."[190] A study of Wikipedia articles on cancer was conducted in 2010 by Yaacov Lawrence of the Kimmel Cancer Center at Thomas Jefferson University. The study was limited to those articles that could be found in the Physician Data Query and excluded those written at the "start" class or "stub" class level. Lawrence found the articles accurate but not very readable, and thought that "Wikipedia's lack of readability (to non-college readers) may reflect its varied origins and haphazard editing".[191] The Economist argued that better-written articles tend to be more reliable: "inelegant or ranting prose usually reflects muddled thoughts and incomplete information".[192] Coverage of topics and systemic bias See also: Notability in the English Wikipedia and Criticism of Wikipedia § Systemic bias in coverage Parts of this article (those related to d:Wikidata:Statistics/Wikipedia) need to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (March 2017) Wikipedia seeks to create a summary of all human knowledge in the form of an online encyclopedia, with each topic covered encyclopedically in one article. Since it has terabytes of disk space, it can have far more topics than can be covered by any printed encyclopedia.[193] The exact degree and manner of coverage on Wikipedia is under constant review by its editors, and disagreements are not uncommon (see deletionism and inclusionism).[194][195] Wikipedia contains materials that some people may find objectionable, offensive, or pornographic because Wikipedia is not censored. The policy has sometimes proved controversial: in 2008, Wikipedia rejected an online petition against the inclusion of images of Muhammad in the English edition of its Muhammad article, citing this policy. The presence of politically, religiously, and pornographically sensitive materials in Wikipedia has led to the censorship of Wikipedia by national authorities in China,[196] Pakistan,[197] and the United Kingdom,[198] among other countries. Pie chart of Wikipedia content by subject as of January 2008[199] A 2008 study conducted by researchers at Carnegie Mellon University and Palo Alto Research Center gave a distribution of topics as well as growth (from July 2006 to January 2008) in each field:[199] Culture and the arts: 30% (210%) Biographies and persons: 15% (97%) Geography and places: 14% (52%) Society and social sciences: 12% (83%) History and events: 11% (143%) Natural and physical sciences: 9% (213%) Technology and the applied sciences: 4% (?6%) Religions and belief systems: 2% (38%) Health: 2% (42%) Mathematics and logic: 1% (146%) Thought and philosophy: 1% (160%) These numbers refer only to the quantity of articles: it is possible for one topic to contain a large number of short articles and another to contain a small number of large ones. Through its "Wikipedia Loves Libraries" program, Wikipedia has partnered with major public libraries such as the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts to expand its coverage of underrepresented subjects and articles.[200] A 2011 study conducted by researchers at the University of Minnesota indicated that male and female editors focus on different coverage topics. There was a greater concentration of females in the People and Arts category, while males focus more on Geography and Science.[201] Coverage of topics and selection bias Research conducted by Mark Graham of the Oxford Internet Institute in 2009 indicated that the geographic distribution of article topics is highly uneven. Africa is most underrepresented.[202] An editorial in The Guardian in 2014 noted that women porn stars are better covered than women writers as a further example.[203] Systemic bias When multiple editors contribute to one topic or set of topics, systemic bias may arise, due to the demographic backgrounds of the editors. In 2011, Wales noted that the unevenness of coverage is a reflection of the demography of the editors, which predominantly consists of young males with high education levels in the developed world (cf. previously).[49] The October 22, 2013 essay by Tom Simonite in MIT's Technology Review titled "The Decline of Wikipedia" discussed the effect of systemic bias and policy creep on the downward trend in the number of editors.[50] Systemic bias on Wikipedia may follow that of culture generally, for example favoring certain nationalities, ethnicities or majority religions.[204] It may more specifically follow the biases of Internet culture, inclining to being young, male, English-speaking, educated, technologically aware, and wealthy enough to spare time for editing. Biases of its own may include over-emphasis on topics such as pop culture, technology, and current events.[204] Taha Yasseri of the University of Oxford, in 2013, studied the statistical trends of systemic bias at Wikipedia introduced by editing conflicts and their resolution.[205][206] His research examined the counterproductive work behavior of edit warring. Yasseri contended that simple reverts or "undo" operations were not the most significant measure of counterproductive behavior at Wikipedia and relied instead on the statistical measurement of detecting "reverting/reverted pairs" or "mutually reverting edit pairs". Such a "mutually reverting edit pair" is defined where one editor reverts the edit of another editor who then, in sequence, returns to revert the first editor in the "mutually reverting edit pairs". The results were tabulated for several language versions of Wikipedia. The English Wikipedia's three largest conflict rates belonged to the articles George W. Bush, Anarchism and Muhammad.[206] By comparison, for the German Wikipedia, the three largest conflict rates at the time of the Oxford study were for the articles covering (i) Croatia, (ii) Scientology and (iii) 9/11 conspiracy theories.[206] Researchers from the Washington University developed a statistical model to measure systematic bias in the behavior of Wikipedia's users regarding controversial topics. The authors focused on behavioral changes of the encyclopedia's administrators after assuming the post, writing that systematic bias occurred after the fact.[207][208] Identifying the filter-bubble problem Dimitra Kessenides, writing for Bloomberg News Weekly, identified the 'filter-bubble' problem as a recurrent and long-standing issue at Wikipedia.[209] As Kessenides states: "If the only way to get an article about the developing world published on Wikipedia was to know a former board member, it was hard to imagine how a random editor in Johannesburg or Bangalore would have any hope... This so-called filter-bubble problem, coined by Eli Pariser, co-founder of the viral video site Upworthy, is the idea that the internet can contribute to the insularity of certain communities. Filter bubbles have been blamed for the spread of misinformation during the 2016 presidential election and for the failure of pundits in the U.K. to anticipate Brexit... Wikipedia's filter-bubble problem is a particularly acute threat for an organization whose stated mission is 'to empower and engage people around the world.'"[209] Explicit content See also: Internet Watch Foundation and Wikipedia and Reporting of child pornography images on Wikimedia Commons “ Problem? What problem? So, you didn't know that Wikipedia has a porn problem? ” — Larry Sanger, [210] Wikipedia has been criticized for allowing information of graphic content. Articles depicting arguably objectionable content (such as Feces, Cadaver, Human penis, Vulva, and Nudity) contain graphic pictures and detailed information easily available to anyone with access to the internet, including children. The site also includes sexual content such as images and videos of masturbation and ejaculation, photographs of nude children, illustrations of zoophilia, and photos from hardcore pornographic films in its articles. The Wikipedia article about Virgin Killer—a 1976 album from German heavy metal band Scorpions—features a picture of the album's original cover, which depicts a naked prepubescent girl. The original release cover caused controversy and was replaced in some countries. In December 2008, access to the Wikipedia article Virgin Killer was blocked for four days by most Internet service providers in the United Kingdom after it was reported by a member of the public as child pornography,[211] to the Internet Watch Foundation (IWF), which issues a stop list to Internet service providers. IWF, a non-profit, non-government-affiliated organization, later criticized the inclusion of the picture as "distasteful".[212] In April 2010, Sanger wrote a letter to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, outlining his concerns that two categories of images on Wikimedia Commons contained child pornography, and were in violation of US federal obscenity law.[213] Sanger later clarified that the images, which were related to pedophilia and one about lolicon, were not of real children, but said that they constituted "obscene visual representations of the sexual abuse of children", under the PROTECT Act of 2003.[214] That law bans photographic child pornography and cartoon images and drawings of children that are obscene under American law.[214] Sanger also expressed concerns about access to the images on Wikipedia in schools.[215] Wikimedia Foundation spokesman Jay Walsh strongly rejected Sanger's accusation,[216] saying that Wikipedia did not have "material we would deem to be illegal. If we did, we would remove it."[216] Following the complaint by Sanger, Wales deleted sexual images without consulting the community. After some editors who volunteer to maintain the site argued that the decision to delete had been made hastily, Wales voluntarily gave up some of the powers he had held up to that time as part of his co-founder status. He wrote in a message to the Wikimedia Foundation mailing-list that this action was "in the interest of encouraging this discussion to be about real philosophical/content issues, rather than be about me and how quickly I acted".[217] Critics, including Wikipediocracy, noticed that many of the pornographic images deleted from Wikipedia since 2010 have reappeared.[218] Privacy One privacy concern in the case of Wikipedia is the right of a private citizen to remain a "private citizen" rather than a "public figure" in the eyes of the law.[219][notes 9] It is a battle between the right to be anonymous in cyberspace and the right to be anonymous in real life ("meatspace"). A particular problem occurs in the case of an individual who is relatively unimportant and for whom there exists a Wikipedia page against her or his wishes. In January 2006, a German court ordered the German Wikipedia shut down within Germany because it stated the full name of Boris Floricic, aka "Tron", a deceased hacker. On February 9, 2006, the injunction against Wikimedia Deutschland was overturned, with the court rejecting the notion that Tron's right to privacy or that of his parents was being violated.[220] Wikipedia has a "Volunteer Response Team" that uses the OTRS system to handle queries without having to reveal the identities of the involved parties. This is used, for example, in confirming the permission for using individual images and other media in the project.[221] Sexism Wikipedia has been described as harboring a battleground culture of sexism and harassment.[222][223] The perceived toxic attitudes and tolerance of violent and abusive language are also reasons put forth for the gender gap in Wikipedia editors.[224] In 2014, a female editor who requested a separate space on Wikipedia to discuss improving civility had her proposal referred to by a male editor using the words "the easiest way to avoid being called a cunt is not to act like one."[225] Operation A group of Wikipedia editors may form a WikiProject to focus their work on a specific topic area, using its associated discussion page to coordinate changes across multiple articles.[226] Wikimedia Foundation and Wikimedia movement affiliates Main article: Wikimedia Foundation Katherine Maher is the third executive director at Wikimedia, following the departure of Lila Tretikov in 2016. Wikipedia is hosted and funded by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization which also operates Wikipedia-related projects such as Wiktionary and Wikibooks. The foundation relies on public contributions and grants to fund its mission.[227] The foundation's 2013 IRS Form 990 shows revenue of $39.7 million and expenses of almost $29 million, with assets of $37.2 million and liabilities of about $2.3 million.[228] In May 2014, Wikimedia Foundation named Lila Tretikov as its second executive director, taking over for Sue Gardner.[229] The Wall Street Journal reported on May 1, 2014, that Tretikov's information technology background from her years at University of California offers Wikipedia an opportunity to develop in more concentrated directions guided by her often repeated position statement that, "Information, like air, wants to be free."[230][231] The same Wall Street Journal article reported these directions of development according to an interview with spokesman Jay Walsh of Wikimedia, who "said Tretikov would address that issue (paid advocacy) as a priority. 'We are really pushing toward more transparency... We are reinforcing that paid advocacy is not welcome.' Initiatives to involve greater diversity of contributors, better mobile support of Wikipedia, new geo-location tools to find local content more easily, and more tools for users in the second and third world are also priorities, Walsh said."[230] Following the departure of Tretikov from Wikipedia due to issues concerning the use of the "superprotection" feature which some language versions of Wikipedia have adopted, Katherine Maher became the third executive director the Wikimedia Foundation in June 2016.[232] Maher has stated that one of her priorities would be the issue of editor harassment endemic to Wikipedia as identified by the Wikipedia board in December. Maher stated regarding the harassment issue that: "It establishes a sense within the community that this is a priority... (and that correction requires that) it has to be more than words."[233] Wikipedia is also supported by many organizations and groups that are affiliated with the Wikimedia Foundation but independently-run, called Wikimedia movement affiliates. These include Wikimedia chapters (which are national or sub-national organizations, such as Wikimedia Deutschland and Wikimédia France), thematic organizations (such as Amical Wikimedia for the Catalan language community), and user groups. These affiliates participate in the promotion, development, and funding of Wikipedia. Software operations and support See also: MediaWiki The operation of Wikipedia depends on MediaWiki, a custom-made, free and open source wiki software platform written in PHP and built upon the MySQL database system.[234] The software incorporates programming features such as a macro language, variables, a transclusion system for templates, and URL redirection. MediaWiki is licensed under the GNU General Public License and it is used by all Wikimedia projects, as well as many other wiki projects. Originally, Wikipedia ran on UseModWiki written in Perl by Clifford Adams (Phase I), which initially required CamelCase for article hyperlinks; the present double bracket style was incorporated later. Starting in January 2002 (Phase II), Wikipedia began running on a PHP wiki engine with a MySQL database; this software was custom-made for Wikipedia by Magnus Manske. The Phase II software was repeatedly modified to accommodate the exponentially increasing demand. In July 2002 (Phase III), Wikipedia shifted to the third-generation software, MediaWiki, originally written by Lee Daniel Crocker. Several MediaWiki extensions are installed[235] to extend the functionality of the MediaWiki software. In April 2005, a Lucene extension[236][237] was added to MediaWiki's built-in search and Wikipedia switched from MySQL to Lucene for searching. The site currently uses Lucene Search 2.1,[238][needs update] which is written in Java and based on Lucene library 2.3.[239] In July 2013, after extensive beta testing, a WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) extension, VisualEditor, was opened to public use.[240][241][242][243] It was met with much rejection and criticism, and was described as "slow and buggy".[244] The feature was changed from opt-out to opt-in afterward. Automated editing Computer programs called bots have been used widely to perform simple and repetitive tasks, such as correcting common misspellings and stylistic issues, or to start articles such as geography entries in a standard format from statistical data.[245][246][247] One controversial contributor massively creating articles with his bot was reported to create up to ten thousand articles on the Swedish Wikipedia on certain days.[248] There are also some bots designed to automatically notify editors when they make common editing errors (such as unmatched quotes or unmatched parenthesis).[249] Edits misidentified by a bot as the work of a banned editor can be restored by other editors. An anti-vandal bot tries to detect and revert vandalism quickly and automatically.[246] Bots can also report edits from particular accounts or IP address ranges, as was done at the time of the MH17 jet downing incident in July 2014.[250] Bots on Wikipedia must be approved prior to activation.[251] According to Andrew Lih, the current expansion of Wikipedia to millions of articles would be difficult to envision without the use of such bots.[252] Wikiprojects, and assessments of articles' importance and quality This section is transcluded from English Wikipedia. (edit | history) Main article: WikiProject A "WikiProject" is a group of contributors who want to work together as a team to improve Wikipedia. These groups often focus on a specific topic area (for example, women's history), a specific location or a specific kind of task (for example, checking newly created pages). The English Wikipedia currently has over 2,000 WikiProjects and activity varies.[253] In 2007, in preparation for producing a print version, the English Wikipedia introduced an assessment scale of the quality of articles.[254] Articles are rated by WikiProjects. The range of quality classes begins with "Stub" (very short pages), followed by "Start", "C" and "B" (in increasing order of quality). Community peer review is needed for the article to enter one of the highest quality classes: either "A", "good article" or the highest, "featured article". Of the about 4.4 million articles and lists assessed as of March 2015, a little more than 5,000 (0.12%) are featured articles, and fewer than 2,000 (0.04%) are featured lists. One featured article per day, as selected by editors, appears on the main page of Wikipedia.[255][256] The articles can also be rated as per "importance" as judged by a WikiProject. Currently, there are 5 importance categories: "low", "mid", "high", "top", and "???" for unclassified/uncertain level. For a particular article, different WikiProjects may assign different importance levels. The Wikipedia Version 1.0 Editorial Team has developed a table (shown below) that displays data of all rated articles by quality and importance, on the English Wikipedia. If an article or list receives different ratings by two or more WikiProjects, then the highest rating is used in the table, pie-charts, and bar-chart. The software regularly auto-updates the data. Researcher Giacomo Poderi found that articles tend to reach featured status via the intensive work of a few editors.[257] A 2010 study found unevenness in quality among featured articles and concluded that the community process is ineffective in assessing the quality of articles.[258] Quality-wise distribution of over 5.5 million articles and lists on the English Wikipedia, as of 29 January 2017[update][259]   Featured articles (0.11%)   Featured lists (0.04%)   A class (0.03%)   Good articles (0.50%)   B class (2.00%)   C class (4.32%)   Start class (26.41%)   Stub class (53.01%)   Lists (3.65%)   Unassessed (9.94%) Importance-wise distribution of over 5.5 million articles and lists on the English Wikipedia, as of 29 January 2017[update][259]   Top (0.91%)   High (3.20%)   Medium (12.21%)   Low (51.68%)   ??? (32.00%) All rated articles by quality and importance Quality Importance Top High Mid Low ??? Total FA 1,189 1,841 1,732 1,091 191 6,044 FL 142 567 670 600 120 2,099 A 224 430 580 372 79 1,685 GA 2,113 4,819 9,439 10,277 1,749 28,397 B 12,177 23,035 35,303 28,337 13,885 112,737 C 10,410 30,260 67,693 94,179 43,950 246,492 Start 17,315 76,691 308,832 802,184 295,178 1,500,200 Stub 4,247 30,928 228,127 1,887,219 844,350 2,994,871 List 3,062 11,393 34,727 94,961 62,202 206,345 Assessed 50,879 179,964 687,103 2,919,220 1,261,704 5,098,870 Unassessed 137 431 1,665 16,008 533,078 551,319 Total 51,016 180,395 688,768 2,935,228 1,794,782 5,650,189 500,000 1,000,000 1,500,000 2,000,000 2,500,000 3,000,000 Top High Medium Low ???   Featured articles   Featured lists   A-class articles   Good articles   B-class articles   C-class articles   Start-class articles   Stub articles   Lists   Unassessed articles and lists [Note: The table above (prepared by the Wikipedia Version 1.0 Editorial Team) is automatically updated daily by User:WP 1.0 bot, but the bar-chart and the two pie-charts are not auto-updated. In them, new data has to be entered by a Wikipedia editor (i.e. user).] Hardware operations and support See also: Wikimedia Foundation § Hardware Wikipedia receives between 25,000 and 60,000 page requests per second, depending on time of day.[260] As of 2008[update] page requests are first passed to a front-end layer of Squid caching servers.[261][needs update] Further statistics, based on a publicly available 3-month Wikipedia access trace, are available.[262] Requests that cannot be served from the Squid cache are sent to load-balancing servers running the Linux Virtual Server software, which in turn pass them to one of the Apache web servers for page rendering from the database. The web servers deliver pages as requested, performing page rendering for all the language editions of Wikipedia. To increase speed further, rendered pages are cached in a distributed memory cache until invalidated, allowing page rendering to be skipped entirely for most common page accesses. Overview of system architecture as of December 2010[update] Wikipedia currently runs on dedicated clusters of Linux servers (mainly Ubuntu).[263][264] As of December 2009[update], there were 300 in Florida and 44 in Amsterdam.[265] By January 22, 2013, Wikipedia had migrated its primary data center to an Equinix facility in Ashburn, Virginia.[266][267] Internal research and operational development In accordance with growing amounts of incoming donations exceeding seven digits in 2013 as recently reported,[50] the Foundation has reached a threshold of assets which qualify its consideration under the principles of industrial organization economics to indicate the need for the re-investment of donations into the internal research and development of the Foundation.[268] Two of the recent projects of such internal research and development have been the creation of a Visual Editor and a largely under-utilized "Thank" tab which were developed for the purpose of ameliorating issues of editor attrition, which have met with limited success.[50][244] The estimates for reinvestment by industrial organizations into internal research and development was studied by Adam Jaffe, who recorded that the range of 4% to 25% annually was to be recommended, with high end technology requiring the higher level of support for internal reinvestment.[269] At the 2013 level of contributions for Wikimedia presently documented as 45 million dollars, the computed budget level recommended by Jaffe and Caballero for reinvestment into internal research and development is between 1.8 million and 11.3 million dollars annually.[269] In 2016, the level of contributions were reported by Blomberg News as being at $77 million annually, updating the Jaffe estimates for the higher level of support to between 3.08 million and 19.2 million dollars annually.[269] Internal news publications Community-produced news publications include the English Wikipedia's The Signpost, founded in 2005 by Michael Snow, an attorney, Wikipedia administrator and former chair of the Wikimedia Foundation board of trustees.[270] It covers news and events from the site, as well as major events from other Wikimedia projects, such as Wikimedia Commons. Similar publications are the German-language Kurier, and the Portuguese-language Correio da Wikipédia. Other past and present community news publications on English Wikipedia include the "Wikiworld" web comic, the Wikipedia Weekly podcast, and newsletters of specific WikiProjects like The Bugle from WikiProject Military History and the monthly newsletter from The Guild of Copy Editors. There are also a number of publications from the Wikimedia Foundation and multilingual publications such as the Wikimedia Blog and This Month in Education. Access to content Content licensing When the project was started in 2001, all text in Wikipedia was covered by the GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL), a copyleft license permitting the redistribution, creation of derivative works, and commercial use of content while authors retain copyright of their work.[271] The GFDL was created for software manuals that come with free software programs licensed under the GPL. This made it a poor choice for a general reference work: for example, the GFDL requires the reprints of materials from Wikipedia to come with a full copy of the GFDL text. In December 2002, the Creative Commons license was released: it was specifically designed for creative works in general, not just for software manuals. The license gained popularity among bloggers and others distributing creative works on the Web. The Wikipedia project sought the switch to the Creative Commons.[272] Because the two licenses, GFDL and Creative Commons, were incompatible, in November 2008, following the request of the project, the Free Software Foundation (FSF) released a new version of the GFDL designed specifically to allow Wikipedia to relicense its content to CC BY-SA by August 1, 2009. (A new version of the GFDL automatically covers Wikipedia contents.) In April 2009, Wikipedia and its sister projects held a community-wide referendum which decided the switch in June 2009.[273][274][275][276] The handling of media files (e.g. image files) varies across language editions. Some language editions, such as the English Wikipedia, include non-free image files under fair use doctrine, while the others have opted not to, in part because of the lack of fair use doctrines in their home countries (e.g. in Japanese copyright law). Media files covered by free content licenses (e.g. Creative Commons' CC BY-SA) are shared across language editions via Wikimedia Commons repository, a project operated by the Wikimedia Foundation. Wikipedia's accommodation of varying international copyright laws regarding images has led some to observe that its photographic coverage of topics lags behind the quality of the encyclopedic text.[277] The Wikimedia Foundation is not a licensor of content, but merely a hosting service for the contributors (and licensors) of the Wikipedia. This position has been successfully defended in court.[278][279] Methods of access Because Wikipedia content is distributed under an open license, anyone can reuse or re-distribute it at no charge. The content of Wikipedia has been published in many forms, both online and offline, outside of the Wikipedia website. Websites – Thousands of "mirror sites" exist that republish content from Wikipedia: two prominent ones, that also include content from other reference sources, are Reference.com and Answers.com. Another example is Wapedia, which began to display Wikipedia content in a mobile-device-friendly format before Wikipedia itself did. Mobile apps – A variety of mobile apps provide access to Wikipedia on hand-held devices, including both Android and iOS devices (see Wikipedia apps). (See also Mobile access.) Search engines – Some web search engines make special use of Wikipedia content when displaying search results: examples include Bing (via technology gained from Powerset)[280] and DuckDuckGo. Compact discs, DVDs – Collections of Wikipedia articles have been published on optical discs. An English version, 2006 Wikipedia CD Selection, contained about 2,000 articles.[281][282] The Polish-language version contains nearly 240,000 articles.[283] There are German- and Spanish-language versions as well.[284][285] Also, "Wikipedia for Schools", the Wikipedia series of CDs / DVDs produced by Wikipedians and SOS Children, is a free, hand-checked, non-commercial selection from Wikipedia targeted around the UK National Curriculum and intended to be useful for much of the English-speaking world.[286] The project is available online; an equivalent print encyclopedia would require roughly 20 volumes. Printed books – There are efforts to put a select subset of Wikipedia's articles into printed book form.[287][288] Since 2009, tens of thousands of print-on-demand books that reproduced English, German, Russian and French Wikipedia articles have been produced by the American company Books LLC and by three Mauritian subsidiaries of the German publisher VDM.[289] Semantic Web – The website DBpedia, begun in 2007, extracts data from the infoboxes and category declarations of the English-language Wikipedia. Wikimedia has created the Wikidata project with a similar objective of storing the basic facts from each page of Wikipedia and the other WMF wikis and make it available in a queriable semantic format, RDF. This is still under development. As of Feb 2014 it has 15,000,000 items and 1,000 properties for describing them. Obtaining the full contents of Wikipedia for reuse presents challenges, since direct cloning via a web crawler is discouraged.[290] Wikipedia publishes "dumps" of its contents, but these are text-only; as of 2007[update] there was no dump available of Wikipedia's images.[291] Several languages of Wikipedia also maintain a reference desk, where volunteers answer questions from the general public. According to a study by Pnina Shachaf in the Journal of Documentation, the quality of the Wikipedia reference desk is comparable to a standard library reference desk, with an accuracy of 55%.[292] Mobile access See also: Help:Mobile access The mobile version of the English Wikipedia's main page Wikipedia's original medium was for users to read and edit content using any standard web browser through a fixed Internet connection. Although Wikipedia content has been accessible through the mobile web since July 2013, The New York Times on February 9, 2014, quoted Erik Möller, deputy director of the Wikimedia Foundation, stating that the transition of internet traffic from desktops to mobile devices was significant and a cause for concern and worry.[16] The article in The New York Times reported the comparison statistics for mobile edits stating that, "Only 20 percent of the readership of the English-language Wikipedia comes via mobile devices, a figure substantially lower than the percentage of mobile traffic for other media sites, many of which approach 50 percent. And the shift to mobile editing has lagged even more."[16] The New York Times reports that Möller has assigned "a team of 10 software developers focused on mobile", out of a total of approximately 200 employees working at the Wikimedia Foundation. One principal concern cited by The New York Times for the "worry" is for Wikipedia to effectively address attrition issues with the number of editors which the online encyclopedia attracts to edit and maintain its content in a mobile access environment.[16] Bloomberg Businessweek reported in July 2014 that Google's Android mobile apps have dominated the largest share of global smartphone shipments for 2013 with 78.6% of market share over their next closest competitor in iOS with 15.2% of the market.[293] At the time of the Tretikov appointment and her posted web interview with Sue Gardner in May 2014, Wikimedia representatives made a technical announcement concerning the number of mobile access systems in the market seeking access to Wikipedia. Directly after the posted web interview, the representatives stated that Wikimedia would be applying an all-inclusive approach to accommodate as many mobile access systems as possible in its efforts for expanding general mobile access, including BlackBerry and the Windows Phone system, making market share a secondary issue.[231] The latest version of the Android app for Wikipedia was released on July 23, 2014, to generally positive reviews, scoring over four of a possible five in a poll of approximately 200,000 users downloading from Google.[294] The latest version for iOS was released on April 3, 2013, to similar reviews.[295] Access to Wikipedia from mobile phones was possible as early as 2004, through the Wireless Application Protocol (WAP), via the Wapedia service. In June 2007 Wikipedia launched en.mobile.wikipedia.org, an official website for wireless devices. In 2009 a newer mobile service was officially released,[296] located at en.m.wikipedia.org, which caters to more advanced mobile devices such as the iPhone, Android-based devices or WebOS-based devices. Several other methods of mobile access to Wikipedia have emerged. Many devices and applications optimize or enhance the display of Wikipedia content for mobile devices, while some also incorporate additional features such as use of Wikipedia metadata (See Wikipedia:Metadata), such as geoinformation.[297][298] Wikipedia Zero is an initiative of the Wikimedia Foundation to expand the reach of the encyclopedia to the developing countries.[299] Andrew Lih and Andrew Brown both maintain editing Wikipedia with smart phones is difficult and this discourages new potential contributors. Several years running the number of Wikipedia editors has been falling and Tom Simonite of MIT Technology Review claims the bureaucratic structure and rules are a factor in this. Simonite alleges some Wikipedians use the labyrinthine rules and guidelines to dominate others and those editors have a vested interest in keeping the status quo.[50] Lih alleges there is serious disagreement among existing contributors how to resolve this. Lih fears for Wikipedia's long term future while Brown fears problems with Wikipedia will remain and rival encyclopedias will not replace it.[300][301] Cultural impact Readership Wikipedia is extremely popular. In February 2014, The New York Times reported that Wikipedia is ranked fifth globally among all websites, stating "With 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors a month […] Wikipedia trails just Yahoo, Facebook, Microsoft and Google, the largest with 1.2 billion unique visitors."[16] In addition to logistic growth in the number of its articles,[302] Wikipedia has steadily gained status as a general reference website since its inception in 2001.[303] About 50% of search engine traffic to Wikipedia comes from Google,[304] a good portion of which is related to academic research.[305] The number of readers of Wikipedia worldwide reached 365 million at the end of 2009.[306] The Pew Internet and American Life project found that one third of US Internet users consulted Wikipedia.[307] In 2011 Business Insider gave Wikipedia a valuation of $4 billion if it ran advertisements.[308] According to "Wikipedia Readership Survey 2011", the average age of Wikipedia readers is 36, with a rough parity between genders. Almost half of Wikipedia readers visit the site more than five times a month, and a similar number of readers specifically look for Wikipedia in search engine results. About 47% of Wikipedia readers do not realize that Wikipedia is a non-profit organization.[309] Cultural significance Main article: Wikipedia in culture Wikipedia Monument in S?ubice, Poland Wikipedia's content has also been used in academic studies, books, conferences, and court cases.[310][311][312] The Parliament of Canada's website refers to Wikipedia's article on same-sex marriage in the "related links" section of its "further reading" list for the Civil Marriage Act.[313] The encyclopedia's assertions are increasingly used as a source by organizations such as the US federal courts and the World Intellectual Property Organization[314] – though mainly for supporting information rather than information decisive to a case.[315] Content appearing on Wikipedia has also been cited as a source and referenced in some US intelligence agency reports.[316] In December 2008, the scientific journal RNA Biology launched a new section for descriptions of families of RNA molecules and requires authors who contribute to the section to also submit a draft article on the RNA family for publication in Wikipedia.[317] Wikipedia has also been used as a source in journalism,[318][319] often without attribution, and several reporters have been dismissed for plagiarizing from Wikipedia.[320][321][322] In 2006, Time magazine recognized Wikipedia's participation (along with YouTube, Reddit, MySpace, and Facebook[323]) in the rapid growth of online collaboration and interaction by millions of people worldwide. In July 2007 Wikipedia was the focus of a 30-minute documentary on BBC Radio 4[324] which argued that, with increased usage and awareness, the number of references to Wikipedia in popular culture is such that the word is one of a select band of 21st-century nouns that are so familiar (Google, Facebook, YouTube) that they no longer need explanation. On September 28, 2007, Italian politician Franco Grillini raised a parliamentary question with the minister of cultural resources and activities about the necessity of freedom of panorama. He said that the lack of such freedom forced Wikipedia, "the seventh most consulted website", to forbid all images of modern Italian buildings and art, and claimed this was hugely damaging to tourist revenues.[325] Play media Wikipedia, an introduction – Erasmus Prize 2015 Jimmy Wales receiving the Quadriga A Mission of Enlightenment award On September 16, 2007, The Washington Post reported that Wikipedia had become a focal point in the 2008 US election campaign, saying: "Type a candidate's name into Google, and among the first results is a Wikipedia page, making those entries arguably as important as any ad in defining a candidate. Already, the presidential entries are being edited, dissected and debated countless times each day."[326] An October 2007 Reuters article, titled "Wikipedia page the latest status symbol", reported the recent phenomenon of how having a Wikipedia article vindicates one's notability.[327] Active participation also has an impact. Law students have been assigned to write Wikipedia articles as an exercise in clear and succinct writing for an uninitiated audience.[328] A working group led by Peter Stone (formed as a part of the Stanford-based project One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence) in its report called Wikipedia "the best-known example of crowdsourcing... that far exceeds traditionally-compiled information sources, such as encyclopedias and dictionaries, in scale and depth."[329] Awards Wikipedia team visiting to Parliament of Asturias Wikipedians meeting after the Asturias awards ceremony Wikipedia won two major awards in May 2004.[330] The first was a Golden Nica for Digital Communities of the annual Prix Ars Electronica contest; this came with a €10,000 (£6,588; $12,700) grant and an invitation to present at the PAE Cyberarts Festival in Austria later that year. The second was a Judges' Webby Award for the "community" category.[331] Wikipedia was also nominated for a "Best Practices" Webby award. In 2007, readers of brandchannel.com voted Wikipedia as the fourth-highest brand ranking, receiving 15% of the votes in answer to the question "Which brand had the most impact on our lives in 2006?"[332] In September 2008, Wikipedia received Quadriga A Mission of Enlightenment award of Werkstatt Deutschland along with Boris Tadi?, Eckart Höfling, and Peter Gabriel. The award was presented to Wales by David Weinberger.[333] In 2015, Wikipedia was awarded both the annual Erasmus Prize, which recognizes exceptional contributions to culture, society or social sciences,[334] and the Spanish Princess of Asturias Award on International Cooperation.[335] Speaking at the Asturian Parliament in Oviedo, the city that hosts the awards ceremony, Jimmy Wales praised the work of the Asturian language Wikipedia users.[336] The night of the ceremony, members of the Wikimedia Foundation held a meeting with Wikipedians from all parts of Spain, including the local Asturian community. Satire See also: Category:Parodies of Wikipedia. Many parodies target Wikipedia's openness and susceptibility to inserted inaccuracies, with characters vandalizing or modifying the online encyclopedia project's articles. Comedian Stephen Colbert has parodied or referenced Wikipedia on numerous episodes of his show The Colbert Report and coined the related term wikiality, meaning "together we can create a reality that we all agree on—the reality we just agreed on".[177] Another example can be found in "Wikipedia Celebrates 750 Years of American Independence", a July 2006 front-page article in The Onion,[337] as well as the 2010 The Onion article "'L.A. Law' Wikipedia Page Viewed 874 Times Today".[338] In an episode of the television comedy The Office U.S., which aired in April 2007, an incompetent office manager (Michael Scott) is shown relying on a hypothetical Wikipedia article for information on negotiation tactics in order to assist him in negotiating lesser pay for an employee.[339] The tactics he used failed, as a joke about the unreliability of Wikipedia and what anyone can do to change its contents. Viewers of the show tried to add the episode's mention of the page as a section of the actual Wikipedia article on negotiation, but this effort was prevented by other users on the article's talk page.[340] "My Number One Doctor", a 2007 episode of the television show Scrubs, played on the perception that Wikipedia is an unreliable reference tool with a scene in which Dr. Perry Cox reacts to a patient who says that a Wikipedia article indicates that the raw food diet reverses the effects of bone cancer by retorting that the same editor who wrote that article also wrote the Battlestar Galactica episode guide.[341] In 2008, the comedic website CollegeHumor produced a video sketch named "Professor Wikipedia", in which the fictitious Professor Wikipedia instructs a class with a medley of unverifiable and occasionally absurd statements.[342] The Dilbert comic strip from May 8, 2009, features a character supporting an improbable claim by saying "Give me ten minutes and then check Wikipedia."[343] In July 2009, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a comedy series called Bigipedia, which was set on a website which was a parody of Wikipedia. Some of the sketches were directly inspired by Wikipedia and its articles.[344] In 2010, comedian Daniel Tosh encouraged viewers of his show, Tosh.0, to visit the show's Wikipedia article and edit it at will. On a later episode, he commented on the edits to the article, most of them offensive, which had been made by the audience and had prompted the article to be locked from editing.[345][346] On August 23, 2013, the New Yorker website published a cartoon with this caption: "Dammit, Manning, have you considered the pronoun war that this is going to start on your Wikipedia page?"[347] In December 2015, John Julius Norwich stated, in a letter published in The Times newspaper, that as an historian he resorted to Wikipedia "at least a dozen times a day", and had never yet caught it out. He described it as "a work of reference as useful as any in existence", with so wide a range that it is almost impossible to find a person, place or thing that it has left uncovered, and that he could never have written his last two books without it.[348][349] Sister projects – Wikimedia Main article: Wikimedia project Wikipedia has also spawned several sister projects, which are also wikis run by the Wikimedia Foundation. These other Wikimedia projects include Wiktionary, a dictionary project launched in December 2002,[350] Wikiquote, a collection of quotations created a week after Wikimedia launched, Wikibooks, a collection of collaboratively written free textbooks and annotated texts, Wikimedia Commons, a site devoted to free-knowledge multimedia, Wikinews, for citizen journalism, and Wikiversity, a project for the creation of free learning materials and the provision of online learning activities.[351] Of these, only Commons has had success comparable to that of Wikipedia. Another sister project of Wikipedia, Wikispecies, is a catalogue of species. In 2012 Wikivoyage, an editable travel guide, and Wikidata, an editable knowledge base, launched. Publishing A group of Wikimedians of the Wikimedia DC chapter at the 2013 DC Wikimedia annual meeting standing in front of the Encyclopædia Britannica (back left) at the US National Archives The most obvious economic effect of Wikipedia has been the death of commercial encyclopedias, especially the printed versions, e.g. Encyclopædia Britannica, which were unable to compete with a product that is essentially free.[352][353][354] Nicholas Carr wrote a 2005 essay, "The amorality of Web 2.0", that criticized websites with user-generated content, like Wikipedia, for possibly leading to professional (and, in his view, superior) content producers' going out of business, because "free trumps quality all the time". Carr wrote: "Implicit in the ecstatic visions of Web 2.0 is the hegemony of the amateur. I for one can't imagine anything more frightening."[355] Others dispute the notion that Wikipedia, or similar efforts, will entirely displace traditional publications. For instance, Chris Anderson, the editor-in-chief of Wired Magazine, wrote in Nature that the "wisdom of crowds" approach of Wikipedia will not displace top scientific journals, with their rigorous peer review process.[356] There is also an ongoing debate about the influence of Wikipedia on the biography publishing business. "The worry is that, if you can get all that information from Wikipedia, what's left for biography?" said Kathryn Hughes, professor of life writing at UEA and author of The Short Life and Long Times of Mrs Beeton and George Eliot: the Last Victorian.[357] Scientific use Wikipedia has seen been widely used as a corpus for linguistic research in computational linguistics, information retrieval and natural language processing. In particular, it commonly serves as a target knowledge base for the entity linking problem, which is then called "wikification",[358] and to the related problem of word sense disambiguation.[359] Methods similar to wikification can in turn be used to find "missing" links in Wikipedia.[360] In 2015, French researchers Dr José Lages of the University of Franche-Comté in Besançon and Dima Shepelyansky of Paul Sabatier University in Toulouse published a global university ranking based on Wikipedia scholarly citations.[361][362][363] They used PageRank "followed by the number of appearances in the 24 different language editions of Wikipedia (descending order) and the century in which they were founded (ascending order)."[363] Related projects A number of interactive multimedia encyclopedias incorporating entries written by the public existed long before Wikipedia was founded. The first of these was the 1986 BBC Domesday Project, which included text (entered on BBC Micro computers) and photographs from over 1 million contributors in the UK, and covered the geography, art, and culture of the UK. This was the first interactive multimedia encyclopedia (and was also the first major multimedia document connected through internal links), with the majority of articles being accessible through an interactive map of the UK. The user interface and part of the content of the Domesday Project were emulated on a website until 2008.[364] Several free-content, collaborative encyclopedias were created around the same period as Wikipedia (e.g. Everything2),[365] with many later being merged into the project (e.g. GNE).[366] One of the most successful early online encyclopedias incorporating entries by the public was h2g2, which was created by Douglas Adams in 1999. The h2g2 encyclopedia is relatively light-hearted, focusing on articles which are both witty and informative. Subsequent collaborative knowledge websites have drawn inspiration from Wikipedia. Some, such as Susning.nu, Enciclopedia Libre, Hudong, and Baidu Baike likewise employ no formal review process, although some like Conservapedia are not as open. Others use more traditional peer review, such as Encyclopedia of Life and the online wiki encyclopedias Scholarpedia and Citizendium. The latter was started by Sanger in an attempt to create a reliable alternative to Wikipedia.[367][368] See also Internet portal Outline of Wikipedia – guide to the subject of Wikipedia presented as a tree structured list of its subtopics; for an outline of the contents of Wikipedia, see Portal:Contents/Outlines Conflict-of-interest editing on Wikipedia Democratization of knowledge Interpedia, an early proposal for a collaborative Internet encyclopedia List of Internet encyclopedias Network effect Print Wikipedia art project to visualize how big Wikipedia is. In cooperation with Wikimedia foundation. QRpedia – multilingual, mobile interface to Wikipedia Wikipedia Review References ^ Sidener, Jonathan (December 6, 2004). "Everyone's Encyclopedia". U-T San Diego. Archived from the original on January 14, 2016. Retrieved October 15, 2006.  ^ Roger Chapman. "Top 40 Website Programming Languages". roadchap.com. Archived from the original on September 22, 2013. Retrieved September 6, 2011.  CS1 maint: Unfit url (link) ^ "Wikipedia founder defends decision to encrypt the site in China". The Verge. Retrieved September 19, 2015.  ^ Bill Tancer (May 1, 2007). "Look Who's Using Wikipedia". Time. Retrieved December 1, 2007. The sheer volume of content […] is partly responsible for the site's dominance as an online reference. When compared to the top 3,200 educational reference sites in the US, Wikipedia is No. 1, capturing 24.3% of all visits to the category . Cf. Bill Tancer (Global Manager, Hitwise), "Wikipedia, Search and School Homework" Archived March 25, 2012, at the Wayback Machine., Hitwise, March 1, 2007. ^ Alex Woodson (July 8, 2007). "Wikipedia remains go-to site for online news". Reuters. Retrieved December 16, 2007. Online encyclopedia Wikipedia has added about 20 million unique monthly visitors in the past year, making it the top online news and information destination, according to Nielsen//NetRatings.  ^ "comScore MMX Ranks Top 50 US Web Properties for August 2012". comScore. September 12, 2012. Retrieved February 6, 2013.  ^ a b c "How popular is wikipedia.org?". Alexa Internet. May 22, 2016. Retrieved September 4, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia pornography row deepens as Wales cedes rights – BBC News". BBC. Retrieved June 28, 2016.  ^ "The Mysterious Workings of Wikis: Who Owns What?". Ecommercetimes.com. Retrieved June 28, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation employee ousted over paid editing". Ars Technica. Retrieved June 28, 2016.  ^ a b Kock, N., Jung, Y., & Syn, T. (2016). Wikipedia and e-Collaboration Research: Opportunities and Challenges. Archived September 27, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. International Journal of e-Collaboration (IJeC), 12(2), 1–8. ^ Mike Miliard (March 1, 2008). "Wikipediots: Who Are These Devoted, Even Obsessive Contributors to Wikipedia?". Salt Lake City Weekly. Retrieved December 18, 2008.  ^ Sidener, Jonathan (October 9, 2006). "Wikipedia family feud rooted in San Diego". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Archived from the original on November 11, 2016. Retrieved May 5, 2009.  ^ "Wiki" in the Hawaiian Dictionary, revised and enlarged edition, University of Hawaii Press, 1986 ^ "Wikipedia cofounder Jimmy Wales on 60 Minutes". CBS News. Retrieved April 6, 2015.  ^ a b c d e f Cohen, Noam (February 9, 2014). "Wikipedia vs. the Small Screen". The New York Times.  ^ "Comparing featured article groups and revision patterns correlations in Wikipedia". First Monday. Retrieved July 13, 2010.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin Wattenberg; Matthew M. McKeon (July 22, 2007). "The Hidden Order of Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved October 30, 2007.  ^ a b Jim Giles (December 2005). "Internet encyclopedias go head to head". Nature. 438 (7070): 900–901. Bibcode:2005Natur.438..900G. doi:10.1038/438900a. PMID 16355180. (subscription required) Note: The study was cited in several news articles; e.g.: "Wikipedia survives research test". BBC News. December 15, 2005.  ^ a b c Black, Edwin (April 19, 2010) Wikipedia – The Dumbing Down of World Knowledge Archived September 9, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., History News Network Retrieved October 21, 2014 ^ a b J. Petrilli, Michael (SPRING 2008/Vol.8, No.2) Wikipedia or Wickedpedia? Archived November 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., Education Next Retrieved October 22, 2014 ^ "The contribution conundrum: Why did Wikipedia succeed while other encyclopedias failed?". Nieman Lab. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Richard M. Stallman (June 20, 2007). "The Free Encyclopedia Project". Free Software Foundation. Retrieved January 4, 2008.  ^ Jonathan Sidener (December 6, 2004). "Everyone's Encyclopedia". U-T San Diego. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved October 15, 2006.  ^ Meyers, Peter (September 20, 2001). "Fact-Driven? Collegial? This Site Wants You". The New York Times. Retrieved November 22, 2007. 'I can start an article that will consist of one paragraph, and then a real expert will come along and add three paragraphs and clean up my one paragraph,' said Larry Sanger of Las Vegas, who founded Wikipedia with Mr. Wales.  ^ a b c Sanger, Larry (April 18, 2005). "The Early History of Nupedia and Wikipedia: A Memoir". Slashdot. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Sanger, Larry (January 17, 2001). "Wikipedia Is Up!". Archived from the original on May 6, 2001. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia-l: LinkBacks?". Retrieved February 20, 2007.  ^ Sanger, Larry (January 10, 2001). "Let's Make a Wiki". Internet Archive. Archived from the original on April 14, 2003. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia: HomePage". Archived from the original on March 31, 2001. Retrieved March 31, 2001.  ^ "Wikipedia:Neutral point of view, Wikipedia (January 21, 2007). ^ Finkelstein, Seth (September 25, 2008). "Read me first: Wikipedia isn't about human potential, whatever Wales says". London: The Guardian.  ^ "Wikipedia, August 8, 2001". Web.archive.bibalex.org. August 8, 2001. Archived from the original on July 27, 2001. Retrieved March 3, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia, September 25, 2001". Web.archive.bibalex.org. Archived from the original on March 31, 2001. Retrieved March 3, 2014.  ^ "Multilingual statistics". Wikipedia. March 30, 2005. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Encyclopedias and Dictionaries". Encyclopædia Britannica. 18 (15th ed.). 2007. pp. 257–286.  ^ "[long] Enciclopedia Libre: msg#00008". Osdir. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Clay Shirky (February 28, 2008). Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing Without Organizations. The Penguin Press via Amazon Online Reader. p. 273. ISBN 1-59420-153-6. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Bobbie Johnson (August 12, 2009). "Wikipedia approaches its limits". The Guardian. London. Retrieved March 31, 2010.  ^ Wikipedia:Modelling_Wikipedia_extended_growth ^ The Singularity is Not Near: Slowing Growth of Wikipedia (PDF). The International Symposium on Wikis. Orlando, Florida. 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 11, 2011.  ^ Evgeny Morozov (November–December 2009). "Edit This Page; Is it the end of Wikipedia". Boston Review.  ^ Cohen, Noam (March 28, 2009). "Wikipedia – Exploring Fact City". The New York Times. Retrieved April 19, 2011.  ^ Austin Gibbons, David Vetrano, Susan Biancani (2012). Wikipedia: Nowhere to grow ^ Jenny Kleeman (November 26, 2009). "Wikipedia falling victim to a war of words". The Guardian. London. Retrieved March 31, 2010.  ^ "Wikipedia: A quantitative analysis". Archived from the original (PDF) on April 3, 2012.  ^ Volunteers Log Off as Wikipedia Ages, The Wall Street Journal, November 27, 2009. ^ Barnett, Emma (November 26, 2009). "Wikipedia's Jimmy Wales denies site is 'losing' thousands of volunteer editors". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved March 31, 2010.  ^ a b Kevin Rawlinson (August 8, 2011). "Wikipedia seeks women to balance its 'geeky' editors". The Independent. Retrieved April 5, 2012.  ^ a b c d e Simonite, Tom (October 22, 2013). "The Decline of Wikipedia". MIT Technology Review. Retrieved November 30, 2013.  ^ "3 Charts That Show How Wikipedia Is Running Out of Admins". The Atlantic. July 16, 2012.  ^ Ward, Katherine. New York Magazine, issue of November 25, 2013, p. 18. ^ "Wikipedia Breaks Into US Top 10 Sites". PCWorld. February 17, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedia.org Site Overview". alexa.com. Retrieved December 4, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia Traffic Analysis Report – Wikipedia Page Views Per Country". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 8, 2015.  ^ Netburn, Deborah (January 19, 2012). "Wikipedia: SOPA protest led 8 million to look up reps in Congress". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved March 6, 2012.  ^ "Wikipedia joins blackout protest at US anti-piracy moves". BBC News. January 18, 2012. Retrieved January 19, 2012.  ^ "SOPA/Blackoutpage". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved January 19, 2012.  ^ Jeff Loveland and Joseph Reagle (January 15, 2013). "Wikipedia and encyclopedic production. New Media & Society. Sage Journals". New Media & Society. 15 (8): 1294. doi:10.1177/1461444812470428.  ^ Rebecca J. Rosen (January 30, 2013). "What If the Great Wikipedia 'Revolution' Was Actually a Reversion? • The Atlantic". Retrieved February 9, 2013.  ^ a b c Varma, Subodh (January 20, 2014). "Google eating into Wikipedia page views?". The Economic Times. Times Internet Limited. Retrieved February 10, 2014.  ^ "Alexa Top 500 Global Sites". Alexa Internet. Retrieved December 28, 2016.  ^ a b "Wikipedia Statistics (English)". stats.wikimedia.org.  ^ a b Zittrain, Jonathan (2008). The Future of the Internet and How to Stop It – Chapter 6: The Lessons of Wikipedia. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-12487-3. Archived from the original on February 16, 2009. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Registration notes ^ Protection Policy ^ Hafner, Katie (June 17, 2006). "Growing Wikipedia Refines Its 'Anyone Can Edit' Policy". The New York Times. Retrieved December 5, 2016.  ^ English Wikipedia's protection policy ^ English Wikipedia's full protection policy ^ a b Birken, P. (December 14, 2008). "Bericht Gesichtete Versionen". Wikide-l (Mailing list) (in German). Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved February 15, 2009.  ^ William Henderson (December 10, 2012). "Wikipedia Has Figured Out A New Way To Stop Vandals In Their Tracks". Business Insider.  ^ Frewin, Jonathan (June 15, 2010). "Wikipedia unlocks divisive pages for editing". BBC News. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ a b Kleinz, Torsten (February 2005). "World of Knowledge" (PDF). Linux Magazine. Retrieved July 13, 2007. The Wikipedia's open structure makes it a target for trolls and vandals who malevolently add incorrect information to articles, get other people tied up in endless discussions, and generally do everything to draw attention to themselves.  ^ Wikipedia:New pages patrol ^ Andrea Ciffolilli, "Phantom authority, self-selective recruitment and retention of members in virtual communities: The case of Wikipedia" Archived December 6, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., First Monday December 2003. ^ West, Andrew G.; Chang, Jian; Venkatasubramanian, Krishna; Sokolsky, Oleg; Lee, Insup (2011). Link Spamming Wikipedia for Profit. 8th Annual Collaboration, Electronic Messaging, Anti-Abuse, and Spam Conference. pp. 152–161. doi:10.1145/2030376.2030394.  ^ Vandalism. Wikipedia. Retrieved November 6, 2012. ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin Wattenberg; Kushal Dave (2004). "Studying Cooperation and Conflict between Authors with History Flow Visualizations" (PDF). Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI). Vienna, Austria: ACM SIGCHI: 575–582. doi:10.1145/985921.985953. ISBN 1-58113-702-8. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 25, 2006. Retrieved January 24, 2007.  ^ Reid Priedhorsky; Jilin Chen; Shyong (Tony) K. Lam; Katherine Panciera; Loren Terveen; John Riedl (November 4, 2007). "Creating, Destroying, and Restoring Value in Wikipedia" (PDF). Association for Computing Machinery GROUP '07 conference proceedings; GroupLens Research, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota. Sanibel Island, Florida. Retrieved October 13, 2007.  ^ a b c d Seigenthaler, John (November 29, 2005). "A False Wikipedia 'biography'". USA Today. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Friedman, Thomas L. (2007). The World is Flat. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. p. 124. ISBN 978-0-374-29278-2.  ^ Buchanan, Brian (November 17, 2006). "Founder shares cautionary tale of libel in cyberspace". archive.firstamendmentcenter.org. Archived from the original on December 21, 2012. Retrieved November 17, 2012.  ^ Helm, Burt (December 13, 2005). "Wikipedia: "A Work in Progress"". BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012. Retrieved July 26, 2012.  ^ "Who's behind Wikipedia?". PC World. February 6, 2008. Archived from the original on February 9, 2008. Retrieved February 7, 2008.  ^ What Wikipedia is not. Retrieved April 1, 2010. "Wikipedia is not a dictionary, usage, or jargon guide." ^ Notability. Retrieved February 13, 2008. "A topic is presumed to be notable if it has received significant coverage in reliable secondary sources that are independent of the subject." ^ No original research. February 13, 2008. "Wikipedia does not publish original thought." ^ Verifiability. February 13, 2008. "Material challenged or likely to be challenged, and all quotations, must be attributed to a reliable, published source." ^ Cohen, Noam (August 9, 2011). "For inclusive mission, Wikipedia is told that written word goes only so far". International Herald Tribune. p. 18. Archived from the original on March 11, 2014 – via vLex. (subscription required) ^ Neutral point of view. February 13, 2008. "All Wikipedia articles and other encyclopedic content must be written from a neutral point of view, representing significant views fairly, proportionately and without bias." ^ Eric Haas (October 26, 2007). "Will Unethical Editing Destroy Wikipedia's Credibility?". AlterNet. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Sanger, Larry (April 18, 2005). "The Early History of Nupedia and Wikipedia: A Memoir". Slashdot. Dice.  ^ Kostakis, Vasilis (March 2010). "Identifying and understanding the problems of Wikipedia's peer governance: The case of inclusionists versus deletionists". First Monday.  ^ Ownership of articles ^ Avoiding Tragedy in the Wiki-Commons, by Andrew George, 12 Va. J.L. & Tech. 8 (2007) ^ Wikipedia:Administrators ^ Mehegan, David (February 13, 2006). "Many contributors, common cause". Boston Globe. Retrieved March 25, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedia:Administrators". Retrieved July 12, 2009.  ^ "Wikipedia:RfA_Review/Reflect". Retrieved September 24, 2009.  ^ Meyer, Robinson (July 16, 2012). "3 Charts That Show How Wikipedia Is Running Out of Admins". The Atlantic. Retrieved September 2, 2012.  ^ Dispute Resolution ^ Coldewey, Devin (June 21, 2012). "Wikipedia is editorial warzone, says study". Technology. NBC News. Retrieved October 29, 2012.  ^ David A. Hoffman; Salil K. Mehra (2009). "Wikitruth through Wikiorder". Emory Law Journal (PDF)|format= requires |url= (help). Emory University School of Law. 59 (1): 181. SSRN 1354424.  ^ David A. Hoffman; Salil K. Mehra (2009). "Wikitruth through Wikiorder". Emory Law Journal (PDF)|format= requires |url= (help). Emory University School of Law. 59 (1): 151–210. SSRN 1354424.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin M. Wattenberg; Jesse Kriss; Frank van Ham (January 3, 2007). "Talk Before You Type: Coordination in Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved June 27, 2008.  ^ Arthur, Charles (December 15, 2005). "Log on and join in, but beware the web cults". The Guardian. London. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Lu Stout, Kristie (August 4, 2003). "Wikipedia: The know-it-all Web site". CNN. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Larry Sanger (December 31, 2004). "Why Wikipedia Must Jettison Its Anti-Elitism". Kuro5hin, Op–Ed. There is a certain mindset associated with unmoderated Usenet groups […] that infects the collectively-managed Wikipedia project: if you react strongly to trolling, that reflects poorly on you, not (necessarily) on the troll. If you […] demand that something be done about constant disruption by trollish behavior, the other listmembers will cry "censorship", attack you, and even come to the defense of the troll. […] The root problem: anti-elitism, or lack of respect for expertise. There is a deeper problem […] which explains both of the above-elaborated problems. Namely, as a community, Wikipedia lacks the habit or tradition of respect for expertise. As a community, far from being elitist, it is anti-elitist (which, in this context, means that expertise is not accorded any special respect, and snubs and disrespect of expertise is tolerated). This is one of my failures: a policy that I attempted to institute in Wikipedia's first year, but for which I did not muster adequate support, was the policy of respecting and deferring politely to experts. (Those who were there will, I hope, remember that I tried very hard.)  ^ T. Kriplean, I. Beschastnikh, et al. (2008). "Articulations of wikiwork: uncovering valued work in Wikipedia through barnstars". Proceedings of the ACM: 47. doi:10.1145/1460563.1460573. ISBN 978-1-60558-007-4.  (Subscription required.) ^ Jean Goodwin (2009). "The Authority of Wikipedia" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on November 22, 2009. Retrieved January 31, 2011. Wikipedia's commitment to anonymity/pseudonymity thus imposes a sort of epistemic agnosticism on its readers  ^ Kittur, Aniket. "Power of the Few vs. Wisdom of the Crowd: Wikipedia and the Rise of the Bourgeoisie" (PDF). Viktoria Institute. Retrieved August 13, 2014.  ^ a b c Blodget, Henry (January 3, 2009). "Who The Hell Writes Wikipedia, Anyway?". Business Insider.  ^ Wilson, Chris (February 22, 2008). "The Wisdom of the Chaperones". Slate. Retrieved August 13, 2014.  ^ Swartz, Aaron (September 4, 2006). "Raw Thought: Who Writes Wikipedia?". Retrieved February 23, 2008.  ^ a b Goldman, Eric. "Wikipedia's Labor Squeeze and its Consequences". 8. Journal on Telecommunications and High Technology Law.  ^ Noveck, Beth Simone. "Wikipedia and the Future of Legal Education". 57. Journal of Legal Education.  ^ "Wikipedia "Good Samaritans" Are on the Money". Scientific American. October 19, 2007. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Yair Amichai–Hamburger, Naama Lamdan, Rinat Madiel, Tsahi Hayat, Personality Characteristics of Wikipedia Members, CyberPsychology & Behavior, December 1, 2008, 11 (6): 679–681; doi:10.1089/cpb.2007.0225. ^ "Wikipedians are 'closed' and 'disagreeable'". New Scientist. Retrieved July 13, 2010.  (Subscription required.) ^ "The Misunderstood Personality Profile of Wikipedia Members". psychologytoday.com. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Giles, Jim (August 4, 2009). "After the boom, is Wikipedia heading for bust?". New Scientist.  ^ "Where Are the Women in Wikipedia? – Room for Debate". NYTimes.com. February 2, 2011. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Lam, Shyong; Anuradha Uduwage; Zhenhua Dong; Shilad Sen; David R. Musicant; Loren Terveen; John Riedl (October 3–5, 2011). "WP:Clubhouse? An Exploration of Wikipedia's Gender Imbalance" (PDF). WikiSym 2011. Retrieved October 28, 2013.  ^ Cohen, Noam. "Define Gender Gap? Look Up Wikipedia's Contributor List". The New York Times. The New York Times Company. Retrieved October 28, 2013.  ^ Chom, Noam (January 31, 2011). "Define Gender Gap? Look Up Wikipedia's Contributor List". The New York Times. p. B–1. Retrieved May 9, 2012.  ^ Basch, Linda (February 6, 2011). "Male-Dominated Web Site Seeking Female Experts" (Letters to the Editor). The New York Times. p. WK–7. Retrieved May 9, 2012.  ^ "OCAD to 'Storm Wikipedia' this fall". CBC News. August 27, 2013. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ Wikimedia Foundation. 2008. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on November 18, 2016. Retrieved December 27, 2016.  ^ "Wikipedia 'completely failed' to fix gender imbalance". BBC News. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Dimitra Kessenides (December 26, 2017). Bloomberg News Weekly, "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". p. 73. ^ "Statistics". English Wikipedia. Retrieved June 21, 2008.  ^ List of Wikipedias ^ "Wikipedia:List of Wikipedias". English Wikipedia. Retrieved April 26, 2017.  ^ List of Wikipedias – Meta ^ "List of Wikipedias". Wikimedia Meta-Wiki. Retrieved 26 April 2017.  ^ "Spelling". Manual of Style. Wikipedia. Retrieved May 19, 2007.  ^ "Countering systemic bias". Retrieved May 19, 2007.  ^ "Fair use". Meta-Wiki. Retrieved July 14, 2007.  ^ "Images on Wikipedia". Retrieved July 14, 2007.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas (January 3, 2007). "The Visual Side of Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved October 30, 2007.  ^ Jimmy Wales, "Wikipedia is an encyclopedia", March 8, 2005, <Wikipedia-l@wikimedia.org> ^ "Meta-Wiki". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 24, 2009.  ^ "Meta-Wiki Statistics". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 24, 2008.  ^ "List of articles every Wikipedia should have". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 24, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia: Translation". English Wikipedia. Retrieved February 3, 2007.  ^ Yasseri, Taha; Sumi, Robert; Kertész, János (January 17, 2012). "Circadian Patterns of Wikipedia Editorial Activity: A Demographic Analysis". PLoS ONE. 7 (1): e30091. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0030091. Retrieved January 17, 2012.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation 2011–12 Annual Plan" (PDF). Wikimedia Foundation. p. 8. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ a b c "The future of Wikipedia: WikiPeaks?". The Economist. March 1, 2014. Retrieved March 11, 2014.  ^ Andrew Lih. Wikipedia. Alternative edit policies at Wikipedia in other languages. ^ Jemielniak, Dariusz (June 22, 2014). "The Unbearable Bureaucracy of Wikipedia". Slate. Retrieved August 18, 2014.  ^ D. Jemielniak, Common Knowledge, Stanford University Press, 2014. ^ Messer-Kruse, Timothy (February 12, 2012) The 'Undue Weight' of Truth on Wikipedia Archived December 18, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. The Chronicle of Higher Education Retrieved March 27, 2014 ^ Colón-Aguirre, Monica &Fleming-May, Rachel A. (October 11, 2012) "You Just Type in What You Are Looking For": Undergraduates' Use of Library Resources vs. Wikipedia Archived April 19, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. (p. 392) The Journal of Academic Librarianship Retrieved March 27, 2014 ^ Bowling Green News (February 27, 2012) Wikipedia experience sparks national debate Archived August 27, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Bowling Green State University Retrieved March 27, 2014 ^ Wisdom? More like dumbness of the crowds | Oliver Kamm – Times Online (archive version 2011-08-14) (Author's own copy Archived September 5, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.) ^ "Plagiarism by Wikipedia editors". Wikipedia Watch. October 27, 2006. Archived from the original on November 25, 2009.  ^ "Wikipedia, Britannica: A Toss-Up". Wired. Associated Press. December 15, 2005. Retrieved August 8, 2015.  ^ Reagle, pp. 165–166. ^ Fatally Flawed: Refuting the recent study on encyclopedic accuracy by the journal Nature Archived July 9, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., Encyclopædia Britannica, March 2006 ^ "Encyclopaedia Britannica and Nature: a response" (PDF). Retrieved July 13, 2010.  ^ "Nature's responses to Encyclopaedia Britannica". Nature. March 30, 2006. Retrieved March 19, 2012.  ^ See author acknowledged comments in response to the citation of the Nature study, at PLoS One, 2014, "Citation of fundamentally flawed Nature quality 'study' ", In response to T. Yasseri et al. (2012) Dynamics of Conflicts in Wikipedia, Published June 20, 2012, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0038869, see "Archived copy". Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2014. , accessed July 21, 2014. ^ "Wikipedia:General disclaimer". English Wikipedia. Retrieved April 22, 2008.  ^ Public Information Research, Wikipedia Watch ^ Raphel, JR. "The 15 Biggest Wikipedia Blunders". PC World. Retrieved September 2, 2009.  ^ Cowen, Tyler (March 14, 2008). "Cooked Books". The New Republic. Archived from the original on March 18, 2008. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Stacy Schiff (July 31, 2006). "Know It All". The New Yorker.  ^ Danah Boyd (January 4, 2005). "Academia and Wikipedia". Many 2 Many: A Group Weblog on Social Software. Corante. Retrieved December 18, 2008. [The author, Danah Boyd, describes herself as] an expert on social media[,] […] a doctoral student in the School of Information at the University of California, Berkeley [,] and a fellow at the Harvard University Berkman Center for Internet & Society [at Harvard Law School.]  ^ Robert McHenry, "The Faith-Based Encyclopedia" Archived January 16, 2006, at the Wayback Machine., Tech Central Station, November 15, 2004. ^ "Inside Wikipedia – Attack of the PR Industry". Deutsche Welle. June 30, 2014. Retrieved July 2, 2014.  ^ "Toward a New Compendium of Knowledge (longer version)". Citizendium. Archived from the original on October 11, 2006. Retrieved October 10, 2006.  ^ a b Elder, Jeff (June 16, 2014). "Wikipedia Strengthens Rules Against Undisclosed Editing". The Wall Street Journal.  ^ Ahrens, Frank (July 9, 2006). "Death by Wikipedia: The Kenneth Lay Chronicles". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 1, 2006.  ^ Kane, Margaret (January 30, 2006). "Politicians notice Wikipedia". CNET. Retrieved January 28, 2007.  ^ Bergstein, Brian (January 23, 2007). "Microsoft offers cash for Wikipedia edit". MSNBC. Retrieved February 1, 2007.  ^ Hafner, Katie (August 19, 2007). "Lifting Corporate Fingerprints From the Editing of Wikipedia". The New York Times. p. 1. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ a b Stephen Colbert (July 30, 2006). "Wikiality". Retrieved October 8, 2015.  ^ "Wide World of Wikipedia". The Emory Wheel. April 21, 2006. Archived from the original on November 7, 2007. Retrieved October 17, 2007.  ^ Waters, N. L. (2007). "Why you can't cite Wikipedia in my class". Communications of the ACM. 50 (9): 15. doi:10.1145/1284621.1284635.  ^ Jaschik, Scott (January 26, 2007). "A Stand Against Wikipedia". Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved January 27, 2007.  ^ Helm, Burt (December 14, 2005). "Wikipedia: 'A Work in Progress'". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on April 21, 2012. Retrieved January 29, 2007.  ^ "Jimmy Wales", Biography Resource Center Online. (Gale, 2006.) ^ Child, Maxwell L., "Professors Split on Wiki Debate" Archived December 20, 2008, at the Wayback Machine., The Harvard Crimson, Monday, February 26, 2007. ^ Chloe Stothart. "Web threatens learning ethos" Archived December 21, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.. The Times Higher Education Supplement, 2007, 1799 (June 22), p. 2. ^ Cohen, Morris; Olson, Kent (2010). Legal Research in a Nutshell (10th ed.). St. Paul, Minnesota, USA: Thomson Reuters. pp. 32–34. ISBN 978-0-314-26408-4.  ^ a b Julie Beck. "Doctors' #1 Source for Healthcare Information: Wikipedia". The Atlantic, March 5, 2014. ^ a b Green, Emma (May 7, 2014). "Can Wikipedia Ever Be a Definitive Medical Text? – Julie Beck". The Atlantic. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Kittur, Aniket; Kraut, Robert E. (2008). "Harnessing the wisdom of crowds in Wikipedia: quality through coordination". Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work. New York: ACM. pp. 37–46. doi:10.1145/1460563.1460572. ISBN 978-1-60558-007-4. [permanent dead link] ^ a b Roy Rosenzweig (June 2006). "Can History be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the Past". The Journal of American History. 93 (1): 117–146. doi:10.2307/4486062. JSTOR 4486062. Archived from the original on April 25, 2010. Retrieved August 11, 2006.  (Center for History and New Media.) ^ Andrew Orlowski (October 18, 2005). "Wikipedia founder admits to serious quality problems". The Register. Retrieved September 30, 2007.  ^ "Cancer information on Wikipedia is accurate, but not very readable, study finds". Science Daily. June 2, 2010. Retrieved December 31, 2010.  ^ "Fact or fiction? Wikipedia's variety of contributors is not only a strength". The Economist. March 10, 2007. Retrieved December 31, 2010.  ^ Wikipedia:PAPER ^ "The battle for Wikipedia's soul". The Economist. March 6, 2008. Retrieved March 7, 2008.  ^ Douglas, Ian (November 10, 2007). "Wikipedia: an online encyclopedia torn apart". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved November 23, 2010.  ^ Sophie Taylor (April 5, 2008). "China allows access to English Wikipedia". Reuters. Retrieved July 29, 2008.  ^ Bruilliard, Karin (May 21, 2010). "Pakistan blocks YouTube a day after shutdown of Facebook over Muhammad issue". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 24, 2011.  ^ "Wikipedia child image censored". BBC News. December 8, 2008. Retrieved December 8, 2008.  ^ a b Kittur, A., Chi, E. H., and Suh, B. 2009. What's in Wikipedia? Mapping Topics and Conflict Using Socially Annotated Category Structure Archived April 13, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. In Proceedings of the 27th international Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Boston, Massachusetts, USA, April 4–9, 2009). CHI '09. ACM, New York, USA, 1509–1512. ^ Petrusich, Amanda (October 20, 2011). "Wikipedia's Deep Dive Into a Library Collection". The New York Times. Retrieved October 28, 2011.  ^ Lam, Shyong; Anuradha Uduwage; Zhenhua Dong; Shilad Sen; David R. Musicant; Loren Terveen; John Riedl (October 3–5, 2011). "WP: Clubhouse? An Exploration of Wikipedia's Gender Imblance" (PDF). WikiSym 2011: 4.  ^ Mark Graham, Mapping the Geographies of Wikipedia Content, Zerogeography.net (November 12, 2009). ^ The Guardian 2014 (London) The Guardian view on Wikipedia: evolving truth Archived November 12, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. ^ a b Quilter, Laura (October 24, 2012). "Systemic Bias in Wikipedia: What It Looks Like, and How to Deal with It". University of Massachusetts – Amherst. Retrieved November 26, 2012.  ^ "Edit Wars Reveal the 10 Most Controversial Topics on Wikipedia[permanent dead link]", MIT Technology Review, July 17, 2013. ^ a b c "The Most Controversial Topics in Wikipedia: A Multilingual and Geographical Analysis by Taha Yasseri, Anselm Spoerri, Mark Graham, Janos Kertesz :: SSRN". Papers.ssrn.com. May 23, 2013. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2269392. SSRN 2269392.  Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ Das, Sanmay; Allen, Lavoie; Malik, Magdon-Ismail (November 1, 2013). "Manipulation among the arbiters of collective intelligence: How Wikipedia administrators mold public opinion". CIKM '13 Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on Information & Knowledge Management. San Francisco, California, USA: ACM. pp. 1097–1106. doi:10.1145/2505515.2505566. ISBN 978-1-4503-2263-8.  ^ Das, Sanmay; Allen, Lavoie; Malik, Magdon-Ismail (December 24, 2016). "Manipulation among the arbiters of collective intelligence: How Wikipedia administrators mold public opinion.". ACM Transactions on the Web. New York, NY, USA: ACM. 10 (4): 24. doi:10.1145/3001937.  ^ a b Dimitra Kessenides (December 22, 2016). "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". Bloomberg News Weekly. p. 72. Retrieved December 26, 2016.  ^ Sanger, Larry. "What should we do about Wikipedia's porn problem?". Retrieved July 26, 2012.  ^ Metz, Cade (December 7, 2008). "Brit ISPs censor Wikipedia over 'child porn' album cover". The Register. Retrieved May 10, 2009.  ^ Raphael, JR (December 10, 2008). "Wikipedia Censorship Sparks Free Speech Debate". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 10, 2009.  ^ Farrell, Nick (April 29, 2010). "Wikipedia denies child abuse allegations: Co-founder grassed the outfit to the FBI". The Inquirer. Retrieved October 9, 2010.  ^ a b Metz, Cade (April 9, 2010). "Wikifounder reports Wikiparent to FBI over 'child porn'". The Register. Retrieved April 19, 2010.  ^ "Wikipedia blasts co-founder's accusations of child porn on website". The Economic Times. India. April 29, 2010. Retrieved April 29, 2010.  ^ a b "Wikipedia blasts talk of child porn at website". Agence France-Presse. April 28, 2010. Retrieved April 29, 2010.  ^ "Wikimedia pornography row deepens as Wales cedes rights". BBC News. May 10, 2010. Retrieved May 19, 2010.  ^ Gray, Lila (September 17, 2013). "Wikipedia Gives Porn a Break". XBIZ.com. Retrieved November 10, 2013.  ^ Andrew McStay, 2014, Privacy and Philosophy: New Media and Affective Protocol Archived April 14, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., New York Peter Lang. ^ Heise – Gericht weist einstweilige Verfügung gegen Wikimedia Deutschland ab (update), by Torsten Kleinz, February 9, 2006. ^ "IT Service Management Software". OTRS.com. Retrieved June 9, 2012.  ^ Paling, Emma. "Wikipedia's Hostility to Women". The Atlantic. Retrieved October 24, 2015.  ^ Auerbach, David. "Encyclopedia Frown". Slate. Retrieved October 24, 2015.  ^ "In UK, rising chorus of outrage over online misogyny". CSMonitor.com.  ^ Paling, Emma (October 21, 2015). "Wikipedia's Hostility to Women". The Atlantic. Retrieved December 10, 2016.  ^ Ayers, Phoebe (2008). How Wikipedia Works. San Francisco: No Starch Press. p. 213. ISBN 1-59327-176-X.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation – Financial Statements – June 30, 2011 and 2010" (PDF). Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation IRS Form 990" (PDF). Retrieved October 14, 2014.  ^ "Press releases/WMF announces new ED Lila Tretikov". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ a b Jeff Elder, The Wall Street Journal, May 1, 2014, "Wikipedia's New Chief: From Soviet Union to World's Sixth-Largest Site". ^ a b Naom Cohen (May 1, 2014). "Media: Open-Source Software Specialist Selected as Executive Director of Wikipedia". The New York Times.  ^ Dimitra Kessenides. Bloomberg News Weekly. December 26, 2016. "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". ^ Dimitra Kessenides. Bloomberg News Weekly. December 26, 2016, p. 74. "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". ^ Mark Bergsma. "Wikimedia Architecture" (PDF). Wikimedia Foundation. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 3, 2009. Retrieved June 27, 2008.  ^ "Version: Installed extensions". . Retrieved August 18, 2014. ^ Michael Snow. "Lucene search: Internal search function returns to service". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved February 26, 2009.  ^ Brion Vibber. "[Wikitech-l] Lucene search". Retrieved February 26, 2009.  ^ "Extension:Lucene-search". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved August 31, 2009.  ^ "mediawiki – Revision 55688: /branches/lucene-search-2.1/lib". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved August 31, 2009.  ^ Emil Protalinski (July 2, 2013). "Wikimedia rolls out WYSIWYG visual editor for logged-in users accessing Wikipedia articles in English". The Next Web. Retrieved July 6, 2013.  ^ Curtis, Sophie (July 23, 2013). "Wikipedia introduces new features to entice editors". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved August 18, 2013.  ^ L.M. (December 13, 2011). "Changes at Wikipedia: Seeing things". The Economist. Retrieved July 28, 2013.  ^ Lucian Parfeni (July 2, 2013). "Wikipedia's New VisualEditor Is the Best Update in Years and You Can Make It Better". Softpedia. Retrieved July 30, 2013.  ^ a b Orlowski, Andrew (August 1, 2013). "Wikipedians say no to Jimmy's 'buggy' WYSIWYG editor". The Register. Retrieved August 18, 2013.  ^ Wikipedia Bot Information ^ a b Daniel Nasaw (July 24, 2012). "Meet the 'bots' that edit Wikipedia". BBC News.  ^ Halliday, Josh; Arthur, Charles (July 26, 2012). "Boot up: The Wikipedia vandalism police, Apple analysts, and more". The Guardian. Retrieved September 5, 2012.  ^ Jervell, Ellen Emmerentze (July 13, 2014). "For This Author, 10,000 Wikipedia Articles Is a Good Day's Work". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 18, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia signpost: Abuse Filter is enabled". English Wikipedia. March 23, 2009. Retrieved July 13, 2010.  ^ Aljazeera, July 21, 2014, "MH17 Wikipedia entry edited from Russian Government IP Address". "Archived copy". Archived from the original on November 16, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2014.  ^ Wikipedia's policy on bots ^ Andrew Lih (2009). The Wikipedia Revolution, chapter Then came the Bots, pp. 99–106. ^ "Wikipedia: Wikiprojects". Retrieved 16 March 2015.  ^ "Wikipedia:Version 1.0 Editorial Team/Assessment". Retrieved 28 October 2007.  ^ "Comparing featured article groups and revision patterns correlations in Wikipedia". First Monday. Retrieved 13 July 2010.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin Wattenberg; Matthew M. McKeon (22 July 2007). "The Hidden Order of Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved 30 October 2007.  ^ Poderi, Giacomo, Wikipedia and the Featured Articles: How a Technological System Can Produce Best Quality Articles, Master thesis, University of Maastricht, October 2008. ^ Lindsey, David (5 April 2010). "Evaluating quality control of Wikipedia's featured articles". First Monday. 15 (4). Retrieved 29 January 2017.  ^ a b Wikipedia:Version 1.0 Editorial Team/Statistics – Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia ^ "Monthly request statistics", Wikimedia. Retrieved October 31, 2008.[dead link] ^ Domas Mituzas. "Wikipedia: Site internals, configuration, code examples and management issues" (PDF). MySQL Users Conference 2007. Retrieved June 27, 2008.  ^ Guido Urdaneta, Guillaume Pierre and Maarten van Steen. "Wikipedia Workload Analysis for Decentralized Hosting". Elsevier Computer Networks 53 (11), pp. 1830–1845, June 2009. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Weiss, Todd R. (October 9, 2008). "Wikipedia simplifies IT infrastructure by moving to one Linux vendor". Computerworld. Retrieved November 1, 2008.  ^ Paul, Ryan (October 9, 2008). "Wikipedia adopts Ubuntu for its server infrastructure". Ars Technica. Retrieved November 1, 2008.  ^ "Server roles at wikitech.wikimedia.org". Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved December 8, 2009.  ^ Palmier, Guillaume. "Wikimedia sites to move to primary data center in Ashburn, Virginia". WMF. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Verge, Jason. "It's Official: Ashburn is Wikipedia's New Home". Data Center Knowledge. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Frederic M. Scherer and David Ross, [1970] 1990. Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance, 3rd ed. Houghton-Mifflin. Description Archived May 3, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. and 1st ed. review extract[dead link].    • Google Scholar search of Frederic M. Scherer ^ a b c Patents, Citations, and Innovations, by Adam B. Jaffe, Manuel Trajtenberg, pp. 89–153. ^ Cohen, Noam (March 5, 2007). "A Contributor to Wikipedia Has His Fictional Side". The New York Times. Retrieved October 18, 2008.  ^ Wikipedia:Copyrights ^ Walter Vermeir (2007). "Resolution:License update". Wikizine. Retrieved December 4, 2007.  ^ Wikimedia ^ "Licensing update/Questions and Answers". Wikimedia Meta. Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved February 15, 2009.  ^ "Licensing_update/Timeline". Wikimedia Meta. Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved April 5, 2009.  ^ "Wikimedia community approves license migration". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved May 21, 2009.  ^ Cohen, Noam (July 19, 2009). "Wikipedia May Be a Font of Facts, but It's a Desert for Photos". New York Times. Retrieved March 9, 2013.  ^ "Wikipedia cleared in French defamation case". Reuters. November 2, 2007. Retrieved November 2, 2007.  ^ Anderson, Nate (May 2, 2008). "Dumb idea: suing Wikipedia for calling you "dumb"". Ars Technica. Retrieved May 4, 2008.  ^ "With Bing Reference". Archived from the original on March 8, 2013. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia on DVD" Archived June 3, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.. Linterweb. Retrieved June 1, 2007. "Linterweb is authorized to make a commercial use of the Wikipedia trademark restricted to the selling of the Encyclopedia CDs and DVDs". ^ "Wikipedia 0.5 Available on a CD-ROM" Archived May 3, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.. Wikipedia on DVD. Linterweb. "The DVD or CD-ROM version 0.5 was commercially available for purchase." Retrieved June 1, 2007. ^ "Polish Wikipedia on DVD". Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia:DVD". Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "CDPedia (Python Argentina)". Retrieved July 7, 2011.  ^ Wikipedia CD Selection. Retrieved September 8, 2009. ^ "Wikipedia turned into book". The Daily Telegraph. London: Telegraph Media Group. June 16, 2009. Archived from the original on September 9, 2009. Retrieved September 8, 2009.  ^ "Wikipedia Selection for Schools". Retrieved July 14, 2012.  ^ Thiel, Thomas (September 27, 2010). "Wikipedia und Amazon: Der Marketplace soll es richten". Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (in German). Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung. Archived from the original on November 26, 2010. Retrieved December 6, 2010.  ^ Wikipedia policies on data download ^ Data dumps: Downloading Images, Wikimedia Meta-Wiki ^ "Wikipedia Reference Desk". Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Brad Stone, "How Google's Android chief, Sundar Pichai, became the most powerful man in mobile", June 30 – July 6, 2014, Bloomberg BusinessWeek, pp. 47–51. ^ "Wikipedia – Android Apps on Google Play". Play.Google.com. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia Mobile on the App Store on iTunes". iTunes.Apple.com. August 4, 2014. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ "Wikimedia Mobile is Officially Launched". Wikimedia Technical Blog. June 30, 2009. Retrieved July 22, 2009.  ^ "Local Points Of Interest In Wikipedia". May 15, 2011. Retrieved May 15, 2011.  ^ "iPhone Gems: Wikipedia Apps". November 30, 2008. Retrieved July 22, 2008.  ^ Ellis, Justin (January 17, 2013). "Wikipedia plans to expand mobile access around the globe with new funding". NiemanLab. Nieman Journalism Lab. Retrieved April 22, 2013.  ^ Andrew Lih (June 20, 2015). "Can Wikipedia Survive?".  ^ Andrew Brown (June 25, 2015). "Wikipedia editors are a dying breed. The reason? Mobile". The Guardian.  ^ "Wikipedia:Modelling Wikipedia's growth". Retrieved December 22, 2007.  ^ "694 Million People Currently Use the Internet Worldwide According To comScore Networks". comScore. May 4, 2006. Archived from the original on July 30, 2008. Retrieved December 16, 2007. Wikipedia has emerged as a site that continues to increase in popularity, both globally and in the US  ^ "Google Traffic To Wikipedia up 166% Year over Year". Hitwise. February 16, 2007. Retrieved December 22, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedia and Academic Research". Hitwise. October 17, 2006. Retrieved February 6, 2008.  ^ West, Stuart. "Wikipedia's Evolving Impact: slideshow presentation at TED2010" (PDF). Retrieved October 23, 2015.  ^ Rainie, Lee; Bill Tancer (December 15, 2007). "Wikipedia users" (PDF). Pew Internet & American Life Project. Pew Research Center. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 6, 2008. Retrieved December 15, 2007. 36% of online American adults consult Wikipedia. It is particularly popular with the well-educated and current college-age students.  ^ SAI (October 7, 2011). "The World's Most Valuable Startups". Business Insider. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ "Research:Wikipedia Readership Survey 2011/Results – Meta". Wikimedia. February 6, 2012. Retrieved April 16, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia:Wikipedia in the media". Wikipedia. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Bourgeois et al. v. Peters et al." (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on February 3, 2007. Retrieved February 6, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedian Justice" (PDF)|format= requires |url= (help). SSRN 1346311.  Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ "LEGISinfo – House Government Bill C-38 (38–1)". Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Arias, Martha L. (January 29, 2007). "Wikipedia: The Free Online Encyclopedia and its Use as Court Source". Internet Business Law Services. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  (The name "World Intellectual Property Office" should however read "World Intellectual Property Organization" in this source.) ^ Cohen, Noam (January 29, 2007). "Courts Turn to Wikipedia, but Selectively". The New York Times. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Aftergood, Steven (March 21, 2007). "The Wikipedia Factor in US Intelligence". Federation of American Scientists Project on Government Secrecy. Retrieved April 14, 2007.  ^ Butler, Declan (December 16, 2008). "Publish in Wikipedia or perish". Nature News. doi:10.1038/news.2008.1312.  ^ Shaw, Donna (February–March 2008). "Wikipedia in the Newsroom". American Journalism Review. Retrieved February 11, 2008.  ^ Lexington (September 24, 2011). "Classlessness in America: The uses and abuses of an enduring myth". The Economist. Retrieved September 27, 2011. Socialist Labour Party of America […] though it can trace its history as far back as 1876, when it was known as the Workingmen's Party, no less an authority than Wikipedia pronounces it "moribund".  ^ "Shizuoka newspaper plagiarized Wikipedia article". Japan News Review. July 5, 2007.  ^ "Express-News staffer resigns after plagiarism in column is discovered" at the Wayback Machine (archived October 15, 2007), San Antonio Express-News, January 9, 2007. ^ Frank Bridgewater. "Inquiry prompts reporter's dismissal". Honolulu Star-Bulletin. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Grossman, Lev (December 13, 2006). "Time's Person of the Year: You". Time. Time. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Radio 4 documentary, BBC". 2007. Retrieved April 24, 2016.  ^ "Comunicato stampa. On. Franco Grillini. Wikipedia. Interrogazione a Rutelli. Con "diritto di panorama" promuovere arte e architettura contemporanea italiana. Rivedere con urgenza legge copyright" [Press release. Honorable Franco Grillini. Wikipedia. Interview with Rutelli about the "right to view" promoting contemporary art and architecture of Italy. Review with urgency copyright law] (in Italian). October 12, 2007. Archived from the original on March 30, 2009. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Jose Antonio Vargas (September 17, 2007). "On Wikipedia, Debating 2008 Hopefuls' Every Facet". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Jennifer Ablan (October 22, 2007). "Wikipedia page the latest status symbol". Reuters. Retrieved October 24, 2007.  ^ Witzleb, Normann (2009). "Engaging with the World: Students of Comparative Law Write for Wikipedia". 19 (1 and 2). Legal Education Review: 83–98.  ^ "AI Research Trends". One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI100). Stanford University. Retrieved September 3, 2016.  ^ "Trophy box", Meta-Wiki (March 28, 2005). ^ "Webby Awards 2004". The International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences. 2004. Archived from the original on July 22, 2011.  ^ Zumpano, Anthony (January 29, 2007). "Similar Search Results: Google Wins". Interbrand. Archived from the original on February 20, 2007. Retrieved January 28, 2007.  ^ "Die Quadriga – Award 2008". Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Erasmus Prize – Praemium Erasmianum". Praemium Erasmianum Foundation. Retrieved January 15, 2015.  ^ "Premio Princesa de Asturias de Cooperación Internacional 2015". Fundación Princesa de Asturias. Retrieved June 17, 2015.  ^ "Los fundadores de Wikipedia destacan la versión en asturiano" [The founders of Wikipedia highlight the Asturian version] (in Spanish). La Nueva España. Retrieved October 20, 2015.  ^ "Wikipedia Celebrates 750 Years Of American Independence". The Onion. July 26, 2006. Retrieved October 15, 2006.  ^ "'L.A. Law' Wikipedia Page Viewed 874 Times Today". The Onion. November 24, 2010.  ^ "The Office: The Negotiation, 3.19". April 5, 2007. Retrieved December 27, 2014.  ^ "'Office' fans, inspired by Michael Scott, flock to edit Wikipedia". USA Today. April 12, 2007. Retrieved December 12, 2014.  ^ Bakken, Janae. "My Number One Doctor"; Scrubs; ABC; December 6, 2007. ^ "Professor Wikipedia – CollegeHumor Video". CollegeHumor. November 17, 2009. Retrieved April 19, 2011.  ^ "Dilbert comic strip for 05/08/2009 from the official Dilbert comic strips archive". Universal Uclick. May 8, 2009. Retrieved March 10, 2013.  ^ "Interview With Nick Doody and Matt Kirshen". British Comedy Guide. Retrieved July 31, 2009.  ^ "Your Wikipedia Entries". Tosh.0. February 3, 2010. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia Updates". Tosh.0. February 3, 2010. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Emily Flake (August 23, 2013). "Manning/Wikipedia cartoon". Retrieved August 26, 2013.  ^ "The obstacles to reforming our prisons – The Times". thetimes.co.uk. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ "john julius norwich -Search – The Times". thetimes.co.uk. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ "Announcement of Wiktionary's creation". meta.wikimedia.org. Retrieved July 14, 2012.  ^ "Our projects", Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved January 24, 2007. ^ Bosman, Julie. "After 244 Years, Encyclopaedia Britannica Stops the Presses". The New York Times. Retrieved January 26, 2015.  ^ "Encyclopedia Britannica Dies At The Hands Of Wikipedia, Gizmocrazed.com (with statista infographic from NYTimes.com)". Gizmocrazed.com. March 20, 2012. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Christopher Caldwell (June 14, 2013). "A chapter in the Enlightenment closes". ft.com. Retrieved June 15, 2013. Bertelsmann did not resort to euphemism this week when it announced the end of the Brockhaus encyclopedia brand. Brockhaus had been publishing reference books for two centuries when the media group bought it in 2008. […] The internet has finished off Brockhaus altogether. […] What Germans like is Wikipedia.  ^ "The amorality of Web 2.0". Rough Type. October 3, 2005. Retrieved July 15, 2006.  ^ "Technical solutions: Wisdom of the crowds". Nature. Retrieved October 10, 2006.  ^ Alison Flood. "Alison Flood: Should traditional biography be buried alongside Shakespeare's breakfast?". The Guardian. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Rada Mihalcea and Andras Csomai (2007). Wikify! Linking Documents to Encyclopedic Knowledge Archived February 18, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. Proc. CIKM. ^ David Milne and Ian H. Witten (2008). Learning to link with Wikipedia. Proc. CIKM. ^ Sisay Fissaha Adafre and [Maarten de Rijke] (2005). Discovering missing links in Wikipedia Archived July 17, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.. Proc. LinkKDD. ^ "Wikipedia-Mining Algorithm Reveals World's Most Influential Universities: An algorithm's list of the most influential universities contains some surprising entries.". MIT Technology Review. December 7, 2015. Retrieved December 27, 2015.  ^ Marmow Shaw, Jessica (December 10, 2015). "Harvard is only the 3rd most influential university in the world, according to this list". MarketWatch. Retrieved December 27, 2015.  ^ a b Bothwell, Ellie (December 15, 2015). "Wikipedia Ranking of World Universities: the top 100. List ranks institutions by search engine results and Wikipedia appearances". Times Higher Education. Retrieved December 27, 2015.  ^ Heart Internet. "Website discussing the emulator of the Domesday Project User Interface". Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Frauenfelder, Mark (November 21, 2000). "The next generation of online encyclopedias". CNN.com. Archived from the original on August 14, 2004.  ^ The Free Encyclopedia Project gnu.org (Archived January 3, 2012, at WebCite) ^ Orlowski, Andrew (September 18, 2006). "Wikipedia founder forks Wikipedia, More experts, less fiddling?". The Register. Retrieved June 27, 2007. Larry Sanger describes the Citizendium project as a "progressive or gradual fork", with the major difference that experts have the final say over edits.  ^ Lyman, Jay (September 20, 2006). "Wikipedia Co-Founder Planning New Expert-Authored Site". LinuxInsider. Retrieved June 27, 2007.  Notes ^ Many (but not all) of the glyphs featured are equivalent to the English letter W or sounds "wi", "wo" or "wa". See Wikipedia logo. ^ Registration is required for certain tasks such as editing protected pages, creating pages in the English Wikipedia, and uploading files. ^ For a user to be considered active in a given month, one or more actions have had to be made in said month. ^ Wikis are a type of website. The word "wiki" itself is from the Hawaiian word for "quick".[14] ^ As of 19:59, Wednesday, April 26, 2017 (UTC) ^ The procrastination principle dictates that you should wait for problems to arise before solving them. ^ Revisions with libelous content, criminal threats, or copyright infringements may be removed completely. ^ See for example the Biographies of Living Persons Noticeboard or Neutral Point of View Noticeboard, created to address content falling under their respective areas. ^ See "Libel" by David McHam for the legal distinction Further reading Academic studies Main article: Academic studies about Wikipedia Leitch, Thomas. Wikipedia U: Knowledge, authority, and a liberal education in the digital age (2014) Jensen, Richard. "Military History on the Electronic Frontier: Wikipedia Fights the War of 1812", The Journal of Military History 76#4 (October 2012): 523–556; online version. Yasseri, Taha; Robert Sumi; János Kertész (2012). Szolnoki, Attila, ed. "Circadian Patterns of Wikipedia Editorial Activity: A Demographic Analysis". PLoS ONE. 7 (1): e30091. arXiv:1109.1746. Bibcode:2012PLoSO...7E0091Y. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0030091. PMC 3260192. PMID 22272279.  Goldman, Eric (2010). "Wikipedia's Labor Squeeze and its Consequences". Journal of Telecommunications and High Technology Law. 8. SSRN 1458162#.  (A blog post by the author.) Nielsen, Finn (August 2007). "Scientific Citations in Wikipedia". First Monday. 12 (8). doi:10.5210/fm.v12i8.1997. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Pfeil, Ulrike; Panayiotis Zaphiris; Chee Siang Ang (2006). "Cultural Differences in Collaborative Authoring of Wikipedia". Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication. 12 (1): 88. doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2006.00316.x. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  Priedhorsky, Reid, Jilin Chen, Shyong (Tony) K. Lam, Katherine Panciera, Loren Terveen, and John Riedl. "Creating, Destroying, and Restoring Value in Wikipedia". Proc. GROUP 2007; doi:10.1145/1316624.1316663 Reagle, Joseph (2007). Do as I Do: Authorial Leadership in Wikipedia (PDF). WikiSym '07: Proceedings of the 2007 International Symposium on Wikis. Montreal, Canada: ACM. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  Rosenzweig, Roy. Can History be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the Past. (Originally published in The Journal of American History 93.1 (June 2006): 117–46.) Wilkinson, Dennis M.; Bernardo A. Huberman (April 2007). "Assessing the Value of Cooperation in Wikipedia". First Monday. 12 (4). doi:10.5210/fm.v12i4.1763. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Aaron Halfaker; R. Stuart Geiger; Jonathan T. Morgan; John Riedl (2012). "The Rise and Decline of an Open Collaboration Community". American Behavioral Scientist. 57 (5): 664. doi:10.1177/0002764212469365. Retrieved August 30, 2012.  Books Main article: List of books about Wikipedia Ayers, Phoebe; Matthews, Charles; Yates, Ben (September 2008). How Wikipedia Works: And How You Can Be a Part of It. San Francisco: No Starch Press. ISBN 978-1-59327-176-3.  Broughton, John (2008). Wikipedia – The Missing Manual. O'Reilly Media. ISBN 0-596-51516-2.  (See book review by Baker, as listed hereafter.) Broughton, John (2008). Wikipedia Reader's Guide. Sebastopol: Pogue Press. ISBN 0-596-52174-X.  Dalby, Andrew (2009). The World and Wikipedia: How We are Editing Reality. Siduri. ISBN 978-0-9562052-0-9.  Jemielniak, Dariusz (2014). Common Knowledge? An Ethnography of Wikipedia. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press. ISBN 9780804789448.  Keen, Andrew (2007). The Cult of the Amateur. Doubleday/Currency. ISBN 978-0-385-52080-5.  (Substantial criticisms of Wikipedia and other web 2.0 projects.) Listen to: Keen, Andrew (June 16, 2007). "Does the Internet Undermine Culture?". National Public Radio, USA.  The NPR interview with A. Keen, Weekend Edition Saturday, June 16, 2007. Lih, Andrew (2009). The Wikipedia Revolution: How a Bunch of Nobodies Created the World's Greatest Encyclopedia. New York: Hyperion. ISBN 978-1-4013-0371-6.  O'Sullivan, Dan (September 24, 2009). Wikipedia: a new community of practice?. Ashgate Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7546-7433-7.  Sheizaf Rafaeli & Yaron Ariel (2008). "Online motivational factors: Incentives for participation and contribution in Wikipedia." In Barak, A. Psychological aspects of cyberspace: Theory, research, applications. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp. 243–267.  Reagle, Joseph Michael Jr. (2010). Good Faith Collaboration: The Culture of Wikipedia. Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA: the MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-01447-2. Retrieved October 25, 2015.  Wells, Herbert George. (2013). World Brain. New Delhi, India: Isha Books (reprint). ISBN 978-9-333-39061-3. Retrieved June 18, 2016.  Book reviews and other articles Baker, Nicholson. "The Charms of Wikipedia". The New York Review of Books, March 20, 2008. Retrieved December 17, 2008. (Book rev. of The Missing Manual, by John Broughton, as listed previously.) Crovitz, L. Gordon. "Wikipedia's Old-Fashioned Revolution: The online encyclopedia is fast becoming the best." (Originally published in Wall Street Journal online – April 6, 2009.) Postrel, Virginia, "Who Killed Wikipedia? : A hardened corps of volunteer editors is the only force protecting Wikipedia. They might also be killing it", Pacific Standard magazine, November/December 2014 issue. Learning resources Wikiversity list of learning resources. (Includes related courses, Web-based seminars, slides, lecture notes, text books, quizzes, glossaries, etc.) The Great Book of Knowledge, Part 1: A Wiki is a Kind of Bus, Ideas, with Paul Kennedy, CBC Radio One, originally broadcast January 15, 2014. Webpage includes a link to the archived audio program (also found here). The radio documentary discusses Wikipedia's history, development and its place within the broader scope of the trend to democratized knowledge. It also includes interviews with several key Wikipedia staff and contributors, including Kat Walsh and Sue Gardner (audio, 53:58, Flash required). Other media coverage See also: List of films about Wikipedia "See Who's Editing Wikipedia – Diebold, the CIA, a Campaign", WIRED, August 14, 2007. Balke, Jeff (March 2008). "For Music Fans: Wikipedia; MySpace". Houston Chronicle. Broken Record (blog). Retrieved December 17, 2008.  Dee, Jonathan (July 1, 2007). "All the News That's Fit to Print Out". The New York Times Magazine. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Giles, Jim (September 20, 2007). "Wikipedia 2.0 – Now with Added Trust". New Scientist. Retrieved January 14, 2008.  Miliard, Mike (December 2, 2007). "Wikipedia Rules". The Phoenix. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Poe, Marshall (September 1, 2006). "The Hive". The Atlantic Monthly. Retrieved March 22, 2008.  Rosenwald, Michael S. (October 23, 2009). "Gatekeeper of D.C.'s entry: Road to city's Wikipedia page goes through a DuPont Circle bedroom". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 22, 2009.  Runciman, David (May 28, 2009). "Like Boiling a Frog". London Review of Books. Retrieved June 3, 2009.  Taylor, Chris (May 29, 2005). "It's a Wiki, Wiki World". Time. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  "Technological Quarterly: Brain Scan: The Free-knowledge Fundamentalist". The Economist Web and Print. June 5, 2008. Retrieved June 5, 2008. Jimmy Wales changed the world with Wikipedia, the hugely popular online encyclopedia that anyone can edit. What will he do next?  "Is Wikipedia Cracking Up?" The Independent, February 3, 2009. "Wikipedia probe into paid-for 'sockpuppet' entries", BBC News', October 21, 2013. "The Decline of Wikipedia", MIT Technology Review, October 22, 2013 Edits to Wikipedia pages on Bell, Garner, Diallo traced to 1 Police Plaza (March 2015), Capital Angola's Wikipedia Pirates Are Exposing Problems (March 2016), Motherboard Dark Side of Wikipedia at the Wayback Machine (archived August 4, 2016) Full Measure with Sharyl Attkinson, April 17, 2016. (Includes video.) Wales, Jimmy (December 9, 2016). "How Wikipedia Works". cato.org. Cato Institute. Jimmy Wales, founder of Wikipedia, discusses the site, how it’s treated by governments, and how it’s fueled by its users.  External links Find more aboutWikipediaat Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Travel guide from Wikivoyage Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Discussion from Meta-Wiki Documentation from MediaWiki Official website (Mobile) – multilingual portal (contains links to all language editions) (wikipedia.com still redirects here) Wikipedia at DMOZ Wikitrends: Wikipedia articles most visited today "Wikipedia collected news and commentary". The Guardian.  Wikipedia topic page at The New York Times Video of TED talk by Jimmy Wales on the birth of Wikipedia v t e Wikipedia Overview Purpose Censorship Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Deletionism and inclusionism Gender bias Racial bias MediaWiki Notability Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators Arbitration Committee Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wikipedian in residence Wikimania People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Larry Sanger Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikipedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Internet Watch Foundation Scientology Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz Lsjbot VisualEditor Art+Feminism #1Lib1Ref Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Wikipediocracy Wiki-Watch Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related Wikimedia movement Wikimedia Foundation projects The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Category v t e Wikis Types Personal Medical Semantic Wiki farm Components Software Markup Interwiki links Lists Wikis Software Markups and parsers Comparisons Software Wiki farms See also History of wikis Creole v t e Wikimedia Foundation People Current Aaron Halfaker Dariusz Jemielniak Guy Kawasaki Katherine Maher Jimmy Wales Past Hampton Catlin Danese Cooper Bishakha Datta Florence Devouard Oscar van Dillen Sue Gardner Arnnon Geshuri Mike Godwin James Heilman Erik Möller Lila Tretikov Luis Villa Content projects Wikipedia MediaWiki Wiktionary Wikiquote Wikibooks Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikinews Wikiversity Wikidata Wikivoyage Other List of Wikipedias List of Wikimedia chapters Wikimania The Signpost Litigation Wikimedia v. NSA Wikimedia movement Knowledge Engine v t e List of Wikipedias by article count 5,000,000+ English 2,000,000+ Cebuano Swedish German 1,000,000+ Dutch French Russian Italian Spanish Waray Polish Vietnamese Japanese 500,000+ Portuguese Chinese Ukrainian Catalan Persian Arabic 200,000+ Norwegian (bokmål/riksmål) Serbo-Croatian Finnish Hungarian Indonesian Korean Czech Romanian Serbian Turkish Malay Basque Esperanto Bulgarian Danish Minangkabau Armenian Kazakh Slovak Min Nan Hebrew 100,000+ Lithuanian Croatian Chechen Estonian Slovene Belarusian Galician Norwegian (nynorsk) Greek Uzbek Latin Simple English Urdu Volapük Hindi Azerbaijani Thai Georgian 50,000+ Tamil Welsh Macedonian Malagasy Occitan Latvian Bosnian Newar Tatar Tajik Tagalog Telugu Albanian Kirghiz Piedmontese Breton Belarusian (Taraškievica) Cantonese Haitian 20,000+ Javanese Kannada Icelandic Asturian Marathi Malayalam Bengali Afrikaans Irish Scots Chuvash West Frisian Burmese Swahili Aragonese Yoruba Ido Nepal Bhasa Sicilian Bishnupriya Manipuri Punjabi Alemannic 10,000+ Sundanese Mongolian Egyptian Arabic Samogitian Yiddish Odia Ossetian Sanskrit 1,000+ Uyghur Northern Sami Pashto Dutch Low Saxon Sindhi Jamaican Creole Crimean Tatar Silesian Assamese Ripuarian Konkani Tulu Wolof Classical Chinese 100+ Zulu Xhosa Bambara Venda Cree Authority control WorldCat Identities VIAF: 195846295 LCCN: no2008072801 ISNI: 0000 0004 4914 788X GND: 7545251-0 SUDOC: 11109383X BNF: cb150837752 (data) NKC: kn20090528031 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia&oldid=776980171" Categories: Wikipedia 2001 establishments in the United States American websites Collaborative projects Creative Commons-licensed websites Free internet encyclopedias Internet properties established in 2001 Multilingual websites Open content projects Social information processing Virtual communities Wikimedia projects Wikis Hidden categories: CS1 maint: Unfit url Webarchive template wayback links Pages containing links to subscription-only content CS1 German-language sources (de) Pages using citations with format and no URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2016 Articles with permanently dead external links Pages using web citations with no URL Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles with dead external links from July 2015 Articles with dead external links from March 2017 CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template webcite links Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use American English from November 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from April 2017 Pages using deprecated image syntax Articles containing potentially dated statements from April 2017 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles including recorded pronunciations Articles containing potentially dated statements from February 2014 Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2015 Articles containing potentially dated statements from January 2017 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from March 2017 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Wikipedia articles in need of updating from November 2016 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2008 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from October 2015 Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2010 Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2009 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007 Articles with DMOZ links Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Articles containing video clips Pages with graphs Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikibooks Wikinews Wikiquote Wikiversity Languages Acèh ???????? Afrikaans Akan Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ?????? ??????? Aragonés ????? Armãneashti Arpetan ??????? Asturianu Avañe'? ???? Aymar aru Az?rbaycanca ?????? Bamanankan ????? Bahasa Banjar Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ??????? Bikol Central Bislama ????????? Boarisch ??????? Bosanski Brezhoneg ?????? Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? Dolnoserbski Eesti ???????? Emiliàn e rumagnòl ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ?? G?k?y? ????? ??????? ?????? ?????? ?????? / Gõychi Konknni ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa Hawai?i ??????? ?????? Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue ??????/inuktitut Iñupiak ???? IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kalaallisut ????? Kapampangan ????????-??????? ??????? ????? / ????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî ???????? ????? ???? Ladino ????? ????? ??? ???? ?????? Latga?u Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Ligure Limburgs Lingála Livvinkarjala La .lojban. Luganda Lumbaart Magyar ?????? ?????????? Malagasy ?????? Malti M?ori ????? ????????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-d??ng-ng?? Mirandés ??????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????? N?huatl Dorerin Naoero Nederlands Nedersaksies ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norfuk / Pitkern Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? Pälzisch Pangasinan ?????? Papiamentu ???? Patois ????? ???? ????????? Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski ???????? Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Q?r?mtatarca Reo tahiti Ripoarisch Român? Romani Rumantsch Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sámegiella Gagana Samoa ????????? Sängö Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana Shqip Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? SiSwati Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????????? / ?????????? ?l?nski Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Sranantongo ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Taqbaylit Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ?????? Tetun ??? ???? ?????? ??? Tsetsêhestâhese Tshivenda Türkçe Türkmençe Twi ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? ???? ???????? / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Võro Walon ?? West-Vlams Winaray Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zazaki Zeêuws Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 24 April 2017, at 14:46. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_content |||Free content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For the use of free content on Wikipedia, see Wikipedia:Free content. Free Cultural Works logo Free content, libre content, or free information, is any kind of functional work, work of art, or other creative content that meets the definition of a free cultural work. Contents 1 Definition 2 Legal matters 2.1 Copyright 2.2 Public domain 2.3 Copyleft 3 Usage 3.1 Media 3.2 Software 3.3 Engineering and technology 3.4 Academia 3.5 Legislation 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Definition[edit] A free cultural work (free content) is, according to the Definition of free cultural works, one that has no significant legal restriction on people's freedom to: use the content and benefit from using it, study the content and apply what is learned, make and distribute copies of the content, change and improve the content and distribute these derivative works.[1][2] Free content encompasses all works in the public domain and also those copyrighted works whose licenses honor and uphold the freedoms mentioned above. Because the Berne Convention in most countries by default grants copyright holders monopolistic control over their creations, copyright content must be explicitly declared free, usually by the referencing or inclusion of licensing statements from within the work. Although there are a great many different definitions in regular everyday use, free content is legally very similar, if not like an identical twin, to open content. An analogy is the use of the rival terms free software and open source, which describe ideological differences rather than legal ones.[3][4][5] For instance, the Open Knowledge Foundation's Open Definition describes "open" as synonymous to the definition of free in the "Definition of Free Cultural Works" (as also in the Open Source Definition and Free Software Definition).[6] For such free/open content both movements recommend the same three Creative Commons licenses, the CC BY, CC BY-SA, and CC0.[7][8][9][10] Legal matters[edit] Copyright[edit] copyright Main article: Copyright Copyright is a legal concept, which gives the author or creator of a work legal control over the duplication and public performance of his or her work. In many jurisdictions, this is limited by a time period after which the works then enter the public domain. Copyright laws are a balance between the rights of creators of intellectual and artistic works and the rights of others to build upon those works. During the time period of copyright the author's work may only be copied, modified, or publicly performed with the consent of the author, unless the use is a fair use. Traditional copyright control limits the use of the work of the author to those who either pay royalties to the author for usage of the authors content, or limit their use to fair use. Secondly it limits the use of content whose author cannot be found.[11] Finally it creates a perceived barrier between authors by limiting derivative works, such as mashups and collaborative content[12] Public domain[edit] public domain Main article: Public domain The public domain is a range of creative works whose copyright has expired, or was never established; as well as ideas and facts[nb 1] which are ineligible for copyright. A public domain work is a work whose author has either relinquished to the public, or no longer can claim control over, the distribution and usage of the work. As such any person may manipulate, distribute, or otherwise utilize the work, without legal ramifications. A work in the public domain or released under a permissive licence may be referred to as "copycenter".[13] Copyleft[edit] Main article: Copyleft copyleft Copyleft is a play on the word copyright and describes the practice of using copyright law to remove restrictions on distributing copies and modified versions of a work.[14] The aim of copyleft is to use the legal framework of copyright to enable non-author parties to be able to reuse and, in many licensing schemes, modify content that is created by an author. Unlike works in the public domain, the author still maintains copyright over the material, however the author has granted a non-exclusive license to any person to distribute, and often modify, the work. Copyleft licenses require that any derivative works be distributed under the same terms, and that the original copyright notices be maintained. A symbol commonly associated with copyleft is a reversal of the copyright symbol, facing the other way; the opening of the C points left rather than right. Unlike the copyright symbol, the copyleft symbol does not have a codified meaning.[15] Usage[edit] Projects that provide free content exist in several areas of interest, such as software, academic literature, general literature, music, images, video, and engineering. Technology has reduced the cost of publication and reduced the entry barrier sufficiently to allow for the production of widely disseminated materials by individuals or small groups. Projects to provide free literature and multimedia content have become increasingly prominent owing to the ease of dissemination of materials that is associated with the development of computer technology. Such dissemination may have been too costly prior to these technological developments. Media[edit] Creative Commons Main article: Creative Commons In media, which includes textual, audio, and visual content, free licensing schemes such as some of the licenses made by Creative Commons have allowed for the dissemination of works under a clear set of legal permissions. Not all of the Creative Commons’ licenses are entirely free: their permissions may range from very liberal general redistribution and modification of the work to a more restrictive redistribution-only licensing. Since February 2008, Creative Commons licenses which are entirely free carry a badge indicating that they are "approved for free cultural works".[16] Repositories exist which exclusively feature free material provide content such as photographs, clip art, music,[17] and literature,.[18] While extensive reuse of free content from one website in another website is legal, it is usually not sensible because of the duplicate content problem. Wikipedia is amongst the most well known databases of user uploaded free content on the web. While the vast majority of content on Wikipedia is free content, some copyrighted material is hosted under Fair-use criteria. Software[edit] OSI logo FSF logo Main article: Free and open-source software Free and open source software, which is also often referred to as open source software and free software, is a maturing technology with major companies utilising free software to provide both services and technology to both end users and technical consumers. The ease of dissemination has allowed for increased modularity, which allows for smaller groups to contribute to projects as well as simplifying collaboration. Open source development models have been classified as having a similar peer-recognition and collaborative benefit incentives that are typified by more classical fields such as scientific research, with the social structures that result from this incentive model decreasing production cost.[19] Given sufficient interest in a software component, by using peer-to-peer distribution methods, distribution costs of software may be reduced, removing the burden of infrastructure maintenance from developers. As distribution resources are simultaneously provided by consumers, these software distribution models are scalable, that is the method is feasible regardless of the number of consumers. In some cases, free software vendors may use peer-to-peer technology as a method of dissemination.[20] In general, project hosting and code distribution is not a problem for the most of free projects as a number of providers offer them these services for free. Engineering and technology[edit] Open source hardware logo Free content principles have been translated into fields such as engineering, where designs and engineering knowledge can be readily shared and duplicated, in order to reduce overheads associated with project development. Open design principles can be applied in engineering and technological applications, with projects in mobile telephony, small-scale manufacture,[21] the automotive industry,[22][23] and even agricultural areas.[24] Technologies such as distributed manufacturing can allow computer-aided manufacturing and computer-aided design techniques to be able to develop small-scale production of components for the development of new, or repair of existing, devices. Rapid fabrication technologies underpin these developments, which allow end users of technology to be able to construct devices from pre-existing blueprints, using software and manufacturing hardware to convert information into physical objects. Academia[edit] open access Main article: Open access (publishing) In academic work, the majority of works are not free, although the percentage of works that are open access is growing rapidly. Open access refers to online research outputs that are free of all restrictions on access (e.g. access tolls) and free of many restrictions on use (e.g. certain copyright and license restrictions).[25] Authors may see open access publishing as a method of expanding the audience that is able to access their work to allow for greater impact of the publication, or may support it for ideological reasons.[26][27][28] Open access publishers such as PLOS and Biomed Central provide capacity for review and publishing of free works; though such publications are currently more common in science than humanities. Various funding institutions and governing research bodies have mandated that academics must produce their works to be open-access, in order to qualify for funding, such as the National Institutes of Health, RCUK (effective 2016) and the EU (effective 2020).[29][30][31][32] At an institutional level some universities, such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), have adopted open access publishing by default by introducing their own mandates.[33] Some mandates may permit delayed publication and may charge researchers for open access publishing.[34][35] Open content publication has been seen as a method of reducing costs associated with information retrieval in research, as universities typically pay to subscribe for access to content that is published through traditional means[10][36][37] whilst improving journal quality by discouraging the submission of research articles of reduced quality.[10] Subscriptions for non-free content journals may be expensive for universities to purchase, though the article are written and peer-reviewed by academics themselves at no cost to the publisher. This has led to disputes between publishers and some universities over subscription costs, such as the one which occurred between the University of California and the Nature Publishing Group.[38][39] For teaching purposes, some universities, including MIT, provide freely available course content, such as lecture notes, video resources and tutorials. This content is distributed via Internet resources to the general public. Publication of such resources may be either by a formal institution-wide program,[40] or alternately via informal content provided by individual academics or departments. Legislation[edit] Any country has its own law and legal system, sustained by its legislation, a set of law-documents — documents containing statutory obligation rules, usually law and created by legislatures. In a democratic country, each law-document is published as open media content, is in principle a free content; but in general there are no explicit license attributed for each law-document, so the license must be interpreted, is a implied license. Only few countries have explicit licenses in its law-documents, as the UK's Open Government Licence (a CC-BY compatible license). In the other countries, the implied license comes from its proper rules (general laws and rules about copyright in government works). The automatic protection provided by Berne Convention not apply to law-documents: Article 2.4 excludes the official texts from the automatic protection. It is also possible to "inherit" the license from context. The set of country's law-documents is made available through national repositories. Examples of law-document open repositories: LexML Brazil, Legislation.gov.uk, N-Lex of EU countries. In general a law-document is offered in more than one (open) official version, but the main one is that published by a government gazette. So, law-documents can eventually inherit license expressed by the repository or by the gazette that contains it. See also[edit] Content (media) Definition of Free Cultural Works Free and open source software Free culture movement Free software movement Freedom of information Libre knowledge Open Content Alliance Open publishing Open-source hardware Permissive free software licence Project Gutenberg Notes[edit] ^ The copyright status of uncreative aggregates of basic data may differ by region, for the USA see Feist Publications v. Rural Telephone Service, for Australia, see Telstra v Desktop Marketing Systems References[edit] ^ Erik Möller, e.a. (2008). "Definition of Free Cultural Works". 1.1. freedomdefined.org. Retrieved 2015-04-20.  ^ Stallman, Richard (November 13, 2008). "Free Software and Free Manuals". Free Software Foundation. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Stallman, Richard. "Why Open Source misses the point of Free Software". Free Software Foundation.  ^ Kelty, Christpher M. (2008). "The Cultural Significance of free Software - Two Bits" (PDF). Duke University press - durham and london. p. 99. Prior to 1998, Free Software referred either to the Free Software Foundation (and the watchful, micromanaging eye of Stallman) or to one of thousands of different commercial, avocational, or university-research projects, processes, licenses, and ideologies that had a variety of names: sourceware, freeware, shareware, open software, public domain software, and so on. The term Open Source, by contrast, sought to encompass them all in one movement.  ^ "Goodbye, "free software"; hello, "open source"". Catb.org. Retrieved 2012-10-25.  ^ Open Definition 2.1 on opendefinition.org "This essential meaning matches that of "open" with respect to software as in the Open Source Definition and is synonymous with "free" or "libre" as in the Free Software Definition and Definition of Free Cultural Works." ^ licenses on opendefinition.com ^ Creative Commons 4.0 BY and BY-SA licenses approved conformant with the Open Definition by Timothy Vollmer on creativecommons.org (December 27th, 2013) ^ Open Definition 2.0 released by Timothy Vollmer on creativecommons.org (October 7th, 2014) ^ a b c "Costs and business models in scientific research publishing: A report commissioned by the Wellcome Trust" (PDF). Retrieved May 23, 2009.  ^ "The Importance of Orphan Works Legislation".  ^ Ben Depoorter; Francesco Parisi (2002). "Fair use and copyright protection: a price theory explanation". International Review of Law and Economics. 21 (4): 453. doi:10.1016/S0144-8188#01)00071-0.  ^ Raymond, Eric S. "Copycenter". The Jargon File. Retrieved August 9, 2008.  ^ Dusollier, S (2003). "Open source and copyleft. Authorship reconsidered?". Columbia journal of Law and the Arts. 26 (296).  ^ Hall, G. Brent (2008). Open Source Approaches in Spatial Data Handling. Springer. p. 29. ISBN 3-540-74830-X. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Linksvayer, Mike (February 20, 2008). "Approved for Free Cultural Works". Creative Commons. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "iRate Radio". SourceForge.net. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "Gutenberg:No Cost or Freedom?". Project Gutenberg. April 23, 2007. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Mustonen, Mikko. "Copyleft – the economics of Linux and other open source software" (PDF). Discussion Paper No. 493. Department of Economics, University of Helsinki. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Pawlak, Michel; Bryce, Ciarán; Laurière, Stéphane (May 29, 2008). "The Practice of Free and Open Source Software Processes" (PDF). Rapport de recherche. inria-00274193, version 2. Institut national de recherche en informatique et en automatique (INRIA). N° 6519 (April 2008). ISSN 0249-6399. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Hendry, Andrew (March 4, 2008). "RepRap: An open-source 3D printer for the masses". Computerworld Australia. The Industry Standard. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Honsig, Markus (January 25, 2006). "The most open of all cars". Technology Review (in German). Heinz Heise. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "Australian drive for green commuter cars". The Sydney Morning Herald. Sydney. 14 June 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2015.  ^ Stewart, Jr., C. Neal (December 2005). "Open-source Agriculture" (PDF). ISB News Report. Information Systems for Biotechnology (ISB). Retrieved March 22, 2009.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Suber, Peter. "Open Access Overview". Earlham.edu. Retrieved on 2011-12-03. ^ Alma Swan; Sheridan Brown (May 2005). "Open access self-archiving: An author study" (PDF). Key Perspectives Limited.  ^ Andrew, Theo (October 30, 2003). "Trends in Self-Posting of Research Material Online by Academic Staff". Ariadne. UKOLN (37). ISSN 1361-3200. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Key Perspectives. "JISC/OSI Journal Authors Survey Report" (PDF). Joint Information Systems Committee (JISC). Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Haslam, Maryanne. "NHMRC Partnership Projects – Funding Policy" (PDF). National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 17, 2009. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "Policy on Enhancing Public Access to Archived Publications Resulting from NIH-Funded Research". Retrieved July 12, 2009.  ^ "Open access - RCUK Policy and revised guidance".  ^ "Outcome of Proceedings, 9526/16 RECH 208 TELECOM 100, The transition towards an Open Science System".  ^ "MIT faculty open access to their scholarly articles". MIT news. 20 March 2009.  ^ "Policy of the Society for General Microbiology towards author self-archiving on PubMed Central and institutional and other repositories". Retrieved April 10, 2009.  ^ "OnlineOpen". Retrieved April 10, 2009.  ^ Mayor, Susan (April 19, 2003). "Libraries face higher costs for academic journals". BMJ: British Medical Journal. BMJ Group. 326 (7394): 840. PMC 1125769.  |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ "AMS Journal price survey". Retrieved May 23, 2009.  ^ "Response from the University of California to the Public statement from Nature Publishing Group regarding subscription renewals at the California Digital Library" (PDF). June 10, 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 26, 2010. Retrieved September 13, 2015.  ^ Hawkes, Nigel (November 10, 2003). "Boycott 'greedy' journal publishers, say scientists". The Times. London. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Retrieved September 13, 2015.  ^ "About OpenCourseWare". Retrieved April 10, 2009.  Further reading[edit] D. Atkins; J. S. Brown; A. L. Hammond (February 2007). A Review of the Open Educational Resources (OER) Movement: Achievements, Challenges, and New Opportunities. (PDF). Report to The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation.  OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development: Giving Knowledge for free – The Emergence of Open Educational Resources. 2007, ISBN 92-64-03174-X. External links[edit] Definition of Free Cultural Works – A definition of "free content" or "free cultural works" similar to the free software definition "Episodes of collective invention" (PDF) (Peter B. Meyer; August 4, 2003) – article on several U.S.-oriented historical examples of free content in technology Open Definition – project by the Open Knowledge Foundation which provides a definition of "open" suitable for content and data What is free content? on WikiEducator v t e Intellectual property activism Issues Copyright infringement Digital rights management Gripe site Intellectual property Legal aspects of file sharing Mashup digital videos music Music piracy Orphan works Patents biological software software patent debate trolling Public domain Concepts All rights reversed Alternative compensation system Anti-copyright notice Business models for open source software Copyleft Commercial use of copyleft works Commons-based peer production Free content Free software license Infoanarchism Libertarian positions Open content Open design Open Music Model Open patent Open-source hardware Open source software Prize system contests Share-alike Video on demand Movements Access to Knowledge movement Anti-copyright Cultural environmentalism Free culture movement Free software movement Organizations Copyright Alliance Creative Commons Electronic Frontier Foundation Free Software Foundation Open Rights Group Organization for Transformative Works The Pirate Bay Piratbyrån Pirate Party Sci-Hub Students for Free Culture People Alexandra Elbakyan Rickard Falkvinge Lawrence Lessig Richard Stallman Peter Sunde Peter Suber Aaron Swartz Documentaries Steal This Film (2006, 2007) Good Copy Bad Copy (2007) RiP!: A Remix Manifesto (2008) TPB AFK: The Pirate Bay Away From Keyboard (2013) The Internet's Own Boy (2014) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Free_content&oldid=775063470" Categories: Free content Digital art Free software Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Pages using ISBN magic links Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages ??????? ???? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Català ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Gaeilge Galego ??? ??????? Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??? Latviešu Magyar ?????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ??? Napulitano ??????? Polski Português ??????? Scots Shqip Simple English Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ??? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 12 April 2017, at 12:27. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Encyclopedia |||Encyclopedia From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article is about the type of reference work. For other uses, see Encyclopedia (disambiguation). This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in German. (December 2015) Click [show] for important translation instructions.  View a machine-translated version of the German article. Google's machine translation is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. After translating, {{Translated|de|Enzyklopädie}} must be added to the talk page to ensure copyright compliance. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. Brockhaus Enzyklopädie An encyclopedia or encyclopaedia (also spelled encyclopædia, see spelling differences)[1] is a type of reference work or compendium holding a comprehensive summary of information from either all branches of knowledge or a particular branch of knowledge.[2] Encyclopedias are divided into articles or entries, which are usually accessed alphabetically by article name.[3] Encyclopedia entries are longer and more detailed than those in most dictionaries.[3] Generally speaking, unlike dictionary entries which focus on linguistic information about words, encyclopedia articles focus on factual information concerning the subject for which the article is named.[4][5][6][7] Encyclopedias have existed for around 2,000 years; the oldest still in existence, Naturalis Historia, was written starting in ca. AD 77 by Pliny the Elder and was not fully revised at the time of his death in AD 79. The modern encyclopedia evolved out of dictionaries around the 17th century. Historically, some encyclopedias were contained in one volume, whereas others, such as the Encyclopædia Britannica, the Enciclopedia Italiana (62 volumes, 56,000 pages) or the world's largest, Enciclopedia universal ilustrada europeo-americana (118 volumes, 105,000 pages), became huge multi-volume works. Some modern encyclopedias, such as Wikipedia, are often electronic and freely available. Contents 1 Etymology 2 Characteristics 3 History 3.1 Ancient times 3.2 Middle Ages 3.3 Renaissance 3.4 18th–19th centuries 3.5 20th century 3.6 21st century 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Etymology See also: American and British English spelling differences § Simplification of ae and oe Title page of "Lucubrationes..." 1541 edition, the first book to use the word encyclopedia in the title The word encyclopedia comes from the Koine Greek ????????? ???????,[8] transliterated enkyklios paideia, meaning "general education" from enkyklios (?????????), meaning "circular, recurrent, required regularly, general"[9] and paideia (???????), meaning "education, rearing of a child";[10] it was reduced to a single word due to an error[11] by copyists of Latin manuscripts. Together, the phrase literally translates as "complete instruction" or "complete knowledge". Indeed, the purpose of an encyclopedia is to collect knowledge disseminated around the globe; to set forth its general system to the men with whom we live, and transmit it to those who will come after us, so that the work of preceding centuries will not become useless to the centuries to come; and so that our offspring, becoming better instructed, will at the same time become more virtuous and happy, and that we should not die without having rendered a service to the human race in the future years to come. —?Diderot[12] Copyists of Latin manuscripts took this phrase to be a single Greek word, enkyklopaidia, with the same meaning, and this spurious Greek word became the New Latin word "encyclopaedia", which in turn came into English. Though the notion of a compendium of knowledge dates back thousands of years, the term was first used in the title of a book in 1517 by Johannes Aventinus: Encyclopedia orbisque doctrinarum, hoc est omnium artium, scientiarum, ipsius philosophiae index ac divisio, and in 1538 by Joachimus Fortius Ringelbergius, Lucubrationes vel potius absolutissima kyklopaideia (Basel, 1538). Title page of Skalich's Encyclopaedia, seu orbis disciplinarum, tam sacrarum quam prophanarum, epistemon from 1559, first to use the word encyclopaedia as a noun in the title The word encyclopaedia was first used as a noun in the title of his book by the Croatian encyclopedist Pavao Skali? in his Encyclopaedia seu orbis disciplinarum tam sacrarum quam prophanarum epistemon (Encyclopaedia, or Knowledge of the World of Disciplines, Basel, 1559). One of the oldest vernacular uses was by François Rabelais in his Pantagruel in 1532.[13][14] Several encyclopedias have names that include the suffix -p(a)edia, e.g., Banglapedia (on matters relevant for Bengal). In British usage, the spellings encyclopedia and encyclopaedia are both current.[15] In American usage, only the former is commonly used.[16] The spelling encyclopædia—with the æ ligature—was frequently used in the 19th century and is increasingly rare, although it is retained in product titles such as Encyclopædia Britannica and others. The Oxford English Dictionary (1989) records encyclopædia and encyclopaedia as equal alternatives (in that order), and notes the æ would be obsolete except that it is preserved in works that have Latin titles. Webster's Third New International Dictionary (1997–2002) features encyclopedia as the main headword and encyclopaedia as a minor variant. In addition, cyclopedia and cyclopaedia are now rarely used shortened forms of the word originating in the 17th century. Characteristics The modern encyclopedia was developed from the dictionary in the 18th century. Historically, both encyclopedias and dictionaries have been researched and written by well-educated, well-informed content experts, but they are significantly different in structure. A dictionary is a linguistic work which primarily focuses on alphabetical listing of words and their definitions. Synonymous words and those related by the subject matter are to be found scattered around the dictionary, giving no obvious place for in-depth treatment. Thus, a dictionary typically provides limited information, analysis or background for the word defined. While it may offer a definition, it may leave the reader lacking in understanding the meaning, significance or limitations of a term, and how the term relates to a broader field of knowledge. An encyclopedia is, allegedly, not written in order to convince, although one of its goals is indeed to convince its reader about its own veracity. In the terms of Aristotle's Modes of persuasion, a dictionary should persuade the reader through logos (conveying only appropriate emotions); it will be expected to have a lack of pathos (it should not stir up irrelevant emotions), and to have little ethos except that of the dictionary itself. To address those needs, an encyclopedia article is typically not limited to simple definitions, and is not limited to defining an individual word, but provides a more extensive meaning for a subject or discipline. In addition to defining and listing synonymous terms for the topic, the article is able to treat the topic's more extensive meaning in more depth and convey the most relevant accumulated knowledge on that subject. An encyclopedia article also often includes many maps and illustrations, as well as bibliography and statistics. Four major elements define an encyclopedia: its subject matter, its scope, its method of organization, and its method of production: Encyclopedias can be general, containing articles on topics in every field (the English-language Encyclopædia Britannica and German Brockhaus are well-known examples). General encyclopedias often contain guides on how to do a variety of things, as well as embedded dictionaries and gazetteers.[citation needed] There are also encyclopedias that cover a wide variety of topics but from a particular cultural, ethnic, or national perspective, such as the Great Soviet Encyclopedia or Encyclopaedia Judaica. Works of encyclopedic scope aim to convey the important accumulated knowledge for their subject domain, such as an encyclopedia of medicine, philosophy, or law. Works vary in the breadth of material and the depth of discussion, depending on the target audience. (For example, the Medical encyclopedia produced by A.D.A.M., Inc. for the U.S. National Institutes of Health.) Some systematic method of organization is essential to making an encyclopedia usable as a work of reference. There have historically been two main methods of organizing printed encyclopedias: the alphabetical method (consisting of a number of separate articles, organized in alphabetical order), or organization by hierarchical categories. The former method is today the most common by far, especially for general works. The fluidity of electronic media, however, allows new possibilities for multiple methods of organization of the same content. Further, electronic media offer previously unimaginable capabilities for search, indexing and cross reference. The epigraph from Horace on the title page of the 18th century Encyclopédie suggests the importance of the structure of an encyclopedia: "What grace may be added to commonplace matters by the power of order and connection." As modern multimedia and the information age have evolved, they have had an ever-increasing effect on the collection, verification, summation, and presentation of information of all kinds. Projects such as Everything2, Encarta, h2g2, and Wikipedia are examples of new forms of the encyclopedia as information retrieval becomes simpler. The method of production for an encyclopedia historically has been supported in both for-profit and non-profit contexts. The Great Soviet Encyclopedia mentioned above was entirely state sponsored, while the Britannica was supported as a for-profit institution. By comparison, Wikipedia is supported by volunteers contributing in a non-profit environment under the organization of the Wikimedia Foundation. Some works entitled "dictionaries" are actually similar to encyclopedias, especially those concerned with a particular field (such as the Dictionary of the Middle Ages, the Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships, and Black's Law Dictionary). The Macquarie Dictionary, Australia's national dictionary, became an encyclopedic dictionary after its first edition in recognition of the use of proper nouns in common communication, and the words derived from such proper nouns. There are some broad differences between encyclopedias and dictionaries. Most noticeably, encyclopedia articles are longer, fuller and more thorough than entries in most general-purpose dictionaries.[3][17] There are differences in content as well. Generally speaking, dictionaries provide linguistic information about words themselves, while encyclopedias focus more on the thing for which those words stand.[4][5][6][7] Thus, while dictionary entries are inextricably fixed to the word described, encyclopedia articles can be given a different entry name. As such, dictionary entries are not fully translatable into other languages, but encyclopedia articles can be.[4] In practice, however, the distinction is not concrete, as there is no clear-cut difference between factual, "encyclopedic" information and linguistic information such as appears in dictionaries.[6][17][18] Thus encyclopedias may contain material that is also found in dictionaries, and vice versa.[18] In particular, dictionary entries often contain factual information about the thing named by the word.[17][18] History Main article: History of encyclopedias Encyclopedias have progressed from the beginning of history in written form, through medieval and modern times in print, and most recently, displayed on computer and distributed via computer networks. Ancient times Naturalis Historiæ, 1669 edition, title page One of the earliest encyclopedic works to have survived to modern times is the Naturalis Historia of Pliny the Elder, a Roman statesman living in the 1st century AD. He compiled a work of 37 chapters covering natural history, architecture, medicine, geography, geology, and all aspects of the world around him. He stated in the preface that he had compiled 20,000 facts from 2000 works by over 200 authors, and added many others from his own experience. The work was published around AD 77-79, although he probably never finished proofing the work before his death in the eruption of Vesuvius in AD 79.[19] Middle Ages Isidore of Seville, one of the greatest scholars of the early Middle Ages, is widely recognized for writing the first encyclopedia of the Middle Ages, the Etymologiae (The Etymologies) or Origines (around 630), in which he compiled a sizable portion of the learning available at his time, both ancient and contemporary. The work has 448 chapters in 20 volumes, and is valuable because of the quotes and fragments of texts by other authors that would have been lost had he not collected them. The most popular encyclopedia of the Carolingian Age was the De universo or De rerum naturis by Rabanus Maurus, written about 830; it was based on Etymologiae.[citation needed] The encyclopedia of Suda, a massive 10th-century Byzantine encyclopedia, had 30 000 entries, many drawing from ancient sources that have since been lost, and often derived from medieval Christian compilers. The text was arranged alphabetically with some slight deviations from common vowel order and place in the Greek alphabet. The early Muslim compilations of knowledge in the Middle Ages included many comprehensive works. Around year 960, the Brethren of Purity of Basra[20] were engaged in their Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity. Notable works include Abu Bakr al-Razi's encyclopedia of science, the Mutazilite Al-Kindi's prolific output of 270 books, and Ibn Sina's medical encyclopedia, which was a standard reference work for centuries. Also notable are works of universal history (or sociology) from Asharites, al-Tabri, al-Masudi, Tabari's History of the Prophets and Kings, Ibn Rustah, al-Athir, and Ibn Khaldun, whose Muqadimmah contains cautions regarding trust in written records that remain wholly applicable today. The enormous encyclopedic work in China of the Four Great Books of Song, compiled by the 11th century AD during the early Song dynasty (960–1279), was a massive literary undertaking for the time. The last encyclopedia of the four, the Prime Tortoise of the Record Bureau, amounted to 9.4 million Chinese characters in 1000 written volumes. In the late Middle Ages, several authors had the ambition of compiling the sum of human knowledge in a certain field or overall, for example Bartholomew of England, Vincent of Beauvais, Radulfus Ardens, Sydrac, Brunetto Latini, Giovanni da Sangiminiano, Pierre Bersuire. Some were women, like Hildegard of Bingen and Herrad of Landsberg. The most successful of those publications were the Speculum maius (Great Mirror) of Vincent of Beauvais and the De proprietatibus rerum (On the Properties of Things) by Bartholomew of England. The latter was translated (or adapted) into French, Provençal, Italian, English, Flemish, Anglo-Norman, Spanish, and German during the Middle Ages. Both were written in the middle of the 13th century. No medieval encyclopedia bore the title Encyclopaedia – they were often called On nature (De natura, De naturis rerum), Mirror (Speculum maius, Speculum universale), Treasure (Trésor).[21] Renaissance Anatomy in Margarita Philosophica, 1565 These works were all hand copied and thus rarely available, beyond wealthy patrons or monastic men of learning: they were expensive, and usually written for those extending knowledge rather than those using it.[22] During the Renaissance, the creation of printing allowed a wider diffusion of encyclopedias and every scholar could have his or her own copy. The De expetendis et fugiendis rebus by Giorgio Valla was posthumously printed in 1501 by Aldo Manuzio in Venice. This work followed the traditional scheme of liberal arts. However, Valla added the translation of ancient Greek works on mathematics (firstly by Archimedes), newly discovered and translated. The Margarita Philosophica by Gregor Reisch, printed in 1503, was a complete encyclopedia explaining the seven liberal arts. The term encyclopaedia was coined by 16th century humanists who misread copies of their texts of Pliny and Quintilian, and combined the two Greek words "enkyklios paideia" into one word, ??????????????.[23] The phrase enkyklios paideia (????????? ???????) was used by Plutarch and the Latin word Encyclopedia came from him. The first work titled in this way was the Encyclopedia orbisque doctrinarum, hoc est omnium artium, scientiarum, ipsius philosophiae index ac divisio written by Johannes Aventinus in 1517.[citation needed] The English physician and philosopher, Sir Thomas Browne used the word 'encyclopaedia' in 1646 in the preface to the reader to define his Pseudodoxia Epidemica, a major work of the 17th-century scientific revolution. Browne structured his encyclopaedia upon the time-honoured schemata of the Renaissance, the so-called 'scale of creation' which ascends through the mineral, vegetable, animal, human, planetary, and cosmological worlds. Pseudodoxia Epidemica was a European best-seller, translated into French, Dutch, and German as well as Latin it went through no fewer than five editions, each revised and augmented, the last edition appearing in 1672. Factors that changed the size of encyclopedias were financial, commercial, legal, and intellectual. During the Renaissance, middle classes were having more time to read and encyclopedias helped them to learn more. Publishers were wanting to increase their output so some countries like Germany start selling books that were missing alphabetical sections to publish faster. Also, publishers could not afford all the resources by themselves so they multiple publishers would come together with their resources to create better encyclopedias. Soon it was difficult financially to continue to produce the amount they wanted to produce so then subscriptions and serial publications were made. This was risky for publishers because they had to find people that would pay all upfront or make payments. When this did work out capital would rise and there would be a steady income for encyclopedias. Later rivalry grew causing copyright to occur due to weak underdeveloped laws. Some publishers would copy another publisher’s work to produce an encyclopedia faster and cheaper so consumers did not have to pay a lot and they would sell more. Encyclopedias made it to where middle class citizens could basically have a small library in their own house. Europeans were becoming more curious about their society around them causing them to revolt against their government.[24] 18th–19th centuries Encyclopédie, 1773 The beginnings of the modern idea of the general-purpose, widely distributed printed encyclopedia precede the 18th century encyclopedists. However, Chambers' Cyclopaedia, or Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences (1728), and the Encyclopédie of Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert (1751 onwards), as well as Encyclopædia Britannica and the Conversations-Lexikon, were the first to realize the form we would recognize today, with a comprehensive scope of topics, discussed in depth and organized in an accessible, systematic method. Chambers, in 1728, followed the earlier lead of John Harris's Lexicon Technicum of 1704 and later editions (see also below); this work was by its title and content "A Universal English Dictionary of Arts and Sciences: Explaining not only the Terms of Art, but the Arts Themselves". During the 19th and early 20th century, many smaller or less developed languages[which?] saw their first encyclopedias, using French, German, and English role models. While encyclopedias in larger languages, having large markets that could support a large editorial staff, churned out new 20-volume works in a few years and new editions with brief intervals, such publication plans often spanned a decade or more in smaller languages.[citation needed] 20th century 1913 advertisement for Encyclopædia Britannica, the oldest and one of the largest contemporary English encyclopedias Popular and affordable encyclopedias such as Harmsworth's Universal Encyclopaedia and the Children's Encyclopaedia appeared in the early 1920s. In the United States, the 1950s and 1960s saw the introduction of several large popular encyclopedias, often sold on installment plans. The best known of these were World Book and Funk and Wagnalls. The second half of the 20th century also saw the proliferation of specialized encyclopedias that compiled topics in specific fields. This trend has continued. Encyclopedias of at least one volume in size now exist for most if not all academic disciplines, including such narrow topics such as bioethics. By the late 20th century, encyclopedias were being published on CD-ROMs for use with personal computers. Microsoft's Encarta, launched in 1993, was a landmark example as it had no printed equivalent. Articles were supplemented with both video and audio files as well as numerous high-quality images. After sixteen years, Microsoft discontinued the Encarta line of products in 2009.[25] 21st century In 2001, Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger launched Wikipedia, a collaboratively edited, multilingual, open-source, free Internet encyclopedia supported by the non-profit Wikimedia Foundation. As of 23 April 2017, there are 5,391,001 articles in the English Wikipedia. There are 287 different editions of Wikipedia. As of February 2014, it had 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors each month.[26] Wikipedia has more than 25 million accounts, out of which there were over 118,000 active editors globally, as of August 2015. Wikipedia's accuracy was found by a Nature study to be close to that of Encyclopædia Britannica,[27] with Wikipedia being much larger. However, critics argue Wikipedia exhibits systemic bias,[28][29] and its group dynamics hinder its goals.[clarification needed] Many academics, historians, teachers, and journalists reject Wikipedia as a reliable source of information, primarily for being a mixture of truths, half truths, and some falsehoods, and that as a resource about many controversial topics, is notoriously subject to manipulation and spin.[citation needed] While Wikipedia is by far the largest web-based encyclopedia, it is not the only one in existence. There are several much smaller, usually more specialized, encyclopedias on various themes, sometimes dedicated to a specific geographic region or time period.[30] See also Bibliography of encyclopedias Biographical dictionary Encyclopedic knowledge Encyclopedism Fictitious entry History of science and technology Lexicography Library science Lists of encyclopedias Thesaurus Speculum literature Portals Access related topics Literature portal Library and information science portal Education portal Notes ^ "encyclopaedia" (online). Oxford English Dictionary (OED.com), Oxford University Press. Retrieved February 18, 2012.  ^ "Encyclopedia.". Archived from the original on August 3, 2007.  Glossary of Library Terms. Riverside City College, Digital Library/Learning Resource Center. Retrieved on: November 17, 2007. ^ a b c Hartmann, R. R. K.; James, Gregory; James, Gregory (1998). Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge. p. 48. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010.  ^ a b c Béjoint, Henri (2000). Modern Lexicography, pp. 30–31. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-829951-6 ^ a b "Encyclopaedia". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved July 27, 2010. An English lexicographer, H.W. Fowler, wrote in the preface to the first edition (1911) of The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Current English language that a dictionary is concerned with the uses of words and phrases and with giving information about the things for which they stand only so far as current use of the words depends upon knowledge of those things. The emphasis in an encyclopedia is much more on the nature of the things for which the words and phrases stand.  ^ a b c Hartmann, R. R. K.; Gregory, James (1998). Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge. p. 49. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010. In contrast with linguistic information, encyclopedia material is more concerned with the description of objective realities than the words or phrases that refer to them. In practice, however, there is no hard and fast boundary between factual and lexical knowledge.  ^ a b Cowie, Anthony Paul (2009). The Oxford History of English Lexicography, Volume I. Oxford University Press. p. 22. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved August 17, 2010. An 'encyclopedia' (encyclopaedia) usually gives more information than a dictionary; it explains not only the words but also the things and concepts referred to by the words.  ^ ????????? ???????, Quintilian, Institutio Oratoria, 1.10.1, at Perseus Project ^ ?????????, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon, at Perseus Project ^ ???????, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon, at Perseus Project ^ According to some accounts, such as the American Heritage Dictionary, copyists of Latin manuscripts took this phrase to be a single Greek word, ?????????????? enkyklopaidia. ^ Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert Encyclopédie. University of Michigan Library:Scholarly Publishing Office and DLXS. Retrieved on: November 17, 2007 ^ Roest, Bert (1997). "Compilation as Theme and Praxis in Franciscan Universal Chronicles". In Peter Binkley. Pre-Modern Encyclopaedic Texts: Proceedings of the Second Comers Congress, Groningen, 1 – July 4, 1996. BRILL. p. 213. ISBN 90-04-10830-0.  ^ Carey, Sorcha (2003). "Two Strategies of Encyclopaedism". Pliny's Catalogue of Culture: Art and Empire in the Natural History. Oxford University Press. p. 17. ISBN 0-19-925913-5.  ^ "encyclopaedia", Chambers Reference Online; "encyclopaedia"[dead link], AskOxford. ^ "encyclopaedia" Archived February 17, 2009, at the Wayback Machine., Bartleby.com; "Encyclopaedia", Merriam Webster."Archived copy". Archived from the original on February 17, 2009. Retrieved 2006-12-12.  CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) ^ a b c Hartmann, R. R. K.; James, Gregory; James, Gregory (1998). "Encyclopedic definition". Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge: 48–49. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010. Usually these two aspects overlap – encyclopedic information being difficult to distinguish from linguistic information – and dictionaries attempt to capture both in the explanation of a meaning...  ^ a b c Béjoint, Henri (2000). Modern Lexicography. Oxford University Press. p. 31. ISBN 0-19-829951-6. The two types, as we have seen, are not easily differentiated; encyclopedias contain information that is also to be found in dictionaries, and vice versa.  ^ Naturalis Historia ^ P.D. Wightman (1953), The Growth of Scientific Ideas ^ Monique Paulmier-Foucart, "Medieval Encyclopaedias", in André Vauchez (ed.), Encyclopedia of the Middle Ages, James Clarke & Co, 2002. ^ See "Encyclopedia" in Dictionary of the Middle Ages. ^ ??????????????, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon, at Perseus Project: "f. l. [= falsa lectio, Latin for "false reading"] for ????????? ???????" ^ Loveland, J. (2012). "Why Encyclopedias Got Bigger … and Smaller". Information & Culture. 47 (2): 233–254. doi:10.1353/lac.2012.0012.  ^ Important Notice: MSN Encarta to be Discontinued. MSN Encarta. Archived from the original on October 31, 2009.  ^ Cohen, Noam (February 9, 2014). "Wikipedia vs. the Small Screen". New York Times.  ^ Giles, Jim (December 2005). "Internet encyclopedias go head to head". Nature. 438 (7070): 900–901. Bibcode:2005Natur.438..900G. doi:10.1038/438900a. PMID 16355180. (subscription required) Note: The study was cited in several news articles; e.g.: "Wikipedia survives research test". BBC News. December 15, 2005.  ^ "Gender Bias in Wikipedia and Britannica". Retrieved June 2, 2015.  ^ "Analyzing and visualizing the semantic coverage of Wikipedia and its authors". Complexity. 12: 30–40. doi:10.1002/cplx.20164. Retrieved June 2, 2015.  ^ Sideris A., "The Encyclopedic Concept in the Web Era", in Ioannides M., Arnold D., Niccolucci F. and K. Mania (eds.), The e-volution of Information Communication Technology in Cultural Heritage. Where Hi-Tech Touches the Past: Risks and Challenges for the 21st Century. VAST 2006, Epoch, Budapest 2006, pp. 192-197. ISBN 963-8046-74-0. References EtymologyOnline "Encyclopaedia". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved July 27, 2010.  Béjoint, Henri (2000). Modern Lexicography. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-829951-6.  C. Codoner, S. Louis, M. Paulmier-Foucart, D. Hüe, M. Salvat, A. Llinares, L'Encyclopédisme. Actes du Colloque de Caen, A. Becq (dir.), Paris, 1991. Bergenholtz, H.; Nielsen, S.; Tarp, S., eds. (2009). Lexicography at a Crossroads: Dictionaries and Encyclopedias Today, Lexicographical Tools Tomorrow. Peter Lang. ISBN 978-3-03911-799-4.  Blom, Phillip (2004). Enlightening the World: Encyclopédie, the Book that Changed the Course of History. New York; Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-4039-6895-1. OCLC 57669780.  Collison, Robert Lewis (1966). Encyclopaedias: Their History Throughout the Ages (2nd ed.). New York, London: Hafner. OCLC 220101699.  Cowie, Anthony Paul (2009). The Oxford History of English Lexicography, Volume I. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved August 17, 2010.  Darnton, Robert (1979). The business of enlightenment : a publishing history of the Encyclopédie, 1775–1800. Cambridge: Belknap Press. ISBN 0-674-08785-2.  Hartmann, R. R. K.; James, Gregory; James, Gregory (1998). Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010.  Kafker, Frank A., ed. (1981). Notable encyclopedias of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries: nine predecessors of the Encyclopédie. Oxford: Voltaire Foundation. ISBN 978-0-7294-0256-9. OCLC 10645788.  Kafker, Frank A., ed. (1994). Notable encyclopedias of the late eighteenth century: eleven successors of the Encyclopédie. Oxford: Voltaire Foundation. ISBN 978-0-7294-0467-9. OCLC 30787125.  Needham, Joseph (1986). "Part 7, Military Technology; the Gunpowder Epic". Science and Civilization in China. 5 – Chemistry and Chemical Technology. Taipei: Caves Books Ltd. ISBN 978-0-521-30358-3. OCLC 59245877.  Rosenzweig, Roy (June 2006). "Can History Be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the Past". Journal of American History. 93 (1): 117–46. doi:10.2307/4486062. ISSN 1945-2314. Archived from the original on April 25, 2010.  Sideris, Athanasios (2006). "The Encyclopedic Concept in the Web Era", in Ioannides M., Arnold D., Niccolucci F. and K. Mania (eds.), The e-volution of Information Communication Technology in Cultural Heritage. Where Hi-Tech Touches the Past: Risks and Challenges for the 21st Century. VAST 2006, Epoch, Budapest, pp. 192–197. ISBN 963-8046-74-0. Walsh, S. Padraig (1968). Anglo-American general encyclopedias: a historical bibliography, 1703–1967. New York: Bowker. p. 270. OCLC 577541.  Yeo, Richard R. (2001). Encyclopaedic visions : scientific dictionaries and enlightenment culture. Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-65191-2. OCLC 45828872.  External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Encyclopedias. Look up encyclopedia, encyclopaedia, or encyclopedic in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikisource has original works on the topic: Encyclopedias Encyclopaedia and Hypertext Internet Accuracy Project – Biographical errors in encyclopedias and almanacs Encyclopedia – Diderot's article on the Encyclopedia from the original Encyclopédie. De expetendis et fugiendis rebus – First Renaissance encyclopedia Errors and inconsistencies in several printed reference books and encyclopedias Archived July 18, 2001, at the Wayback Machine. Digital encyclopedias put the world at your fingertips – CNET article Encyclopedias online University of Wisconsin – Stout listing by category Chambers' Cyclopaedia, 1728, with the 1753 supplement Encyclopædia Americana, 1851, Francis Lieber ed. (Boston: Mussey & Co.) at the University of Michigan Making of America site Encyclopædia Britannica, articles and illustrations from 9th ed., 1875–89, and 10th ed., 1902–03. Texts on Wikisource: "Cyclopædia". Collier's New Encyclopedia. 1921.  "Encyclopædia". Encyclopedia Americana. 1920.  "Encyclopædia". The New Student's Reference Work. 1914.  "Encyclopaedia". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.  "Encyclopædia". The Nuttall Encyclopædia. 1907.  "Encyclopædia". New International Encyclopedia. 1905.  "Cyclopædia". The American Cyclopædia. 1879.  Authority control GND: 4014986-9 NDL: 00563841 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Encyclopedia&oldid=774134996" Categories: Encyclopedias Works about history Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2016 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown Pages containing links to subscription-only content Pages using ISBN magic links Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use mdy dates from February 2016 Articles to be expanded from December 2015 All articles to be expanded Featured articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Articles containing Ancient Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Collier's Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW with an wstitle parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Nuttall Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans Akan Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti Asturianu ???? Az?rbaycanca Bamanankan ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski Eesti ???????? Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ??? Hawai?i ??????? ?????? Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ????? / ????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Ladino ????? ??? Latga?u Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Limburgs Lumbaart Magyar ?????????? Malagasy ?????? Malti ????? ????????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-d??ng-ng?? Mirandés ?????? ?????????? N?huatl Nederlands Nedersaksies ?????? ??? Napulitano ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan ???? ????? ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ?????? Papiamentu ???? ????????? Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski ???????? Português Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? ????????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????????? / ?????????? ?l?nski ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ?????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? ???????? / Uyghurche Vèneto Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Walon ?? Winaray Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?????? ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 6 April 2017, at 14:10. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Introduction |||Wikipedia:Introduction From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Help:Contents Introduction   Learn more about editing   Explore Wikipedia   Tutorial What is Wikipedia? Play media A short video about the satisfaction editors get from contributing Wikipedia is a free encyclopedia, written collaboratively by the people who use it. It is a special type of website designed to make collaboration easy, called a wiki. Many people are constantly improving Wikipedia, making thousands of changes per hour. All of these changes are recorded in article histories and recent changes. For a more detailed account of the project, see About Wikipedia. How you can contribute Click "Edit" to change an article Play media Editing tutorial for Wikipedia Don't be afraid to edit – anyone can edit almost every page, and we are encouraged to be bold! Find something that can be improved and make it better—for example, spelling, grammar, rewriting for readability, adding content, or removing non-constructive edits. If you wish to add new facts, please try to provide references so they may be verified, or suggest them on the article's discussion page. Changes to controversial topics and Wikipedia's main pages should usually be discussed first. Contributing to Wikipedia will provide you with resources on all the basics needed to use, comment on, and contribute to Wikipedia. Remember – you can't break Wikipedia; all edits can be reversed, fixed or improved later. Wikipedia is allowed to be imperfect. So go ahead, edit an article and help make Wikipedia the best information source on the Internet! Donate – Wikipedia is free to use, but relies on donations and grants to do so. Please consider donating using the Donate to Wikipedia link on the left to help with the project's running costs and expansion. Why not try out the editor right now? Click here to edit the sandbox, a place to make test edits. (If there is already some text there, add to the end of the text.) Type some text. Click Show preview to test your changes, or Save page when you're happy with the way it looks. Next: Learn more about editing ? Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Introduction&oldid=680454568" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia quick introductions Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Afrikaans Alemannisch Ænglisc ??????? ??????? ???? ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski ?????? Català Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ??????? ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano ????? Kapampangan ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî Ladino ??? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Limburgs Magyar ?????????? ?????? ???? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ??? Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ???? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Romani Runa Simi ??????? Sámegiella ????????? Sardu Scots Sicilianu Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ??? Türkçe ?????? ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 10 September 2015, at 23:28. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:Statistics |||Statistics Jump to: navigation, search Page statistics Content pages 5,393,677 Pages (All pages in the wiki, including talk pages, redirects, etc.) 41,989,775 Uploaded files 844,765 Edit statistics Page edits since Wikipedia was set up 886,655,828 Average edits per page 21.12 User statistics Registered users 30,796,046 Active registered users (list of members) (Users who have performed an action in the last 30 days) 135,691 Bots (list of members) 314 Administrators (list of members) 1,263 Bureaucrats (list of members) 22 Pending changes reviewers (list of members) 6,772 Stewards (list of members) 0 Account creators (list of members) 342 Importers (list of members) 2 Transwiki importers (list of members) 0 IP block exemptions (list of members) 164 Oversighters (list of members) 50 Founder (list of members) 1 Rollbackers (list of members) 5,723 Autopatrolled (list of members) 3,647 Researchers (list of members) 10 File movers (list of members) 397 Checkusers (list of members) 39 Template editors (list of members) 154 Mass message senders (list of members) 47 Extended confirmed users (list of members) 33,796 Page movers (list of members) 132 New page reviewers (list of members) 392 Edit filter managers (list of members) 169 Confirmed users (list of members) 481 Course coordinators (list of members) 24 Course online volunteers (list of members) 91 Course campus volunteers (list of members) 104 Course instructors (list of members) 215 Other statistics Queued mass messages 0 Other statistics Internal statistics See here for the job queue statistic ("jobs") Special:ValidationStatistics: Pending changes statistics See also Wikipedia:Statistics and Category:Wikipedia statistics for a fuller list of pages that provide, analyze or discuss Wikipedia statistics. External statistics Most viewed pages Site traffic statistics Article traffic statistics Wikipedia Statistics - Tables - English Alexa traffic analysis for Wikipedia Wikipedia.org is more popular than... Other Wikipedias Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:Statistics" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Special page Variants Views More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools Upload file Special pages Printable version Languages Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/English_language |||English language From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For other uses, see English (disambiguation). English Pronunciation /????l??/[1] Region Originally England now worldwide (see Geographical distribution, below) Native speakers 360–400 million (2006)[2] L2 speakers: 400 million; as a foreign language: 600–700 million[2] Language family Indo-European Germanic West Germanic Ingvaeonic Anglo-Frisian Anglic English Early forms Old English Middle English Early Modern English Writing system Latin script (English alphabet) English Braille, Unified English Braille Signed forms Manually coded English (multiple systems) Official status Official language in 67 countries 27 non-sovereign entities Various organisations United Nations European Union Commonwealth of Nations Council of Europe ICC IOC ISO NATO WTO NAFTA OAS OECD OIC OPEC GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development* PIF UKUSA Agreement ASEAN ASEAN Economic Community SAARC Turkic Council ECO Language codes ISO 639-1 en ISO 639-2 eng ISO 639-3 eng Glottolog stan1293[3] Linguasphere 52-ABA   Countries of the world where English is a majority native language   Countries where English is official but not a majority native language This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. English i/????l??/ is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and is now the global lingua franca.[4][5] Named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to England, it ultimately derives its name from the Anglia (Angeln) peninsula in the Baltic Sea. It is most closely related to the Frisian languages, but its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages in the early medieval period, and later by Romance languages, particularly Latin and French.[6] English is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. It is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland, and New Zealand, and is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa, and South Asia.[7] It is the third most common native language in the world, after Mandarin and Spanish.[8] It is the most widely learned second language and an official language of the United Nations, of the European Union, and of many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a set of Anglo-Frisian dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the fifth century, are called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England, and was a period in which the language was influenced by French.[9] Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London and the King James Bible, and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.[10] Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, modern English spread around the world from the 17th to mid-20th centuries. Through all types of printed and electronic media, as well as the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and in professional contexts such as science, navigation, and law.[11] Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax.[12] Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. Despite noticeable variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions – in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar and spelling – English-speakers from around the world are able to communicate with one another with relative ease. Contents 1 Classification 2 History 2.1 Proto-Germanic to Old English 2.2 Middle English 2.3 Early Modern English 2.4 Spread of Modern English 3 Geographical distribution 3.1 Three circles of English-speaking countries 3.2 Pluricentric English 3.3 English as a global language 4 Phonology 4.1 Consonants 4.2 Vowels 4.3 Phonotactics 4.4 Stress, rhythm and intonation 4.5 Regional variation 5 Grammar 5.1 Nouns and noun phrases 5.1.1 Adjectives 5.1.2 Pronouns, case and person 5.1.3 Prepositions 5.2 Verbs and verb phrases 5.2.1 Tense, aspect and mood 5.2.2 Phrasal verbs 5.2.3 Adverbs 5.3 Syntax 5.3.1 Basic constituent order 5.3.2 Clause syntax 5.3.3 Auxiliary verb constructions 5.3.4 Questions 5.3.5 Discourse level syntax 6 Vocabulary 6.1 Word formation processes 6.2 Word origins 6.3 English loanwords and calques in other languages 7 Writing system 8 Dialects, accents, and varieties 8.1 UK and Ireland 8.2 North America 8.3 Australia and New Zealand 8.4 Africa, the Caribbean, and South Asia 9 References 10 Bibliography 11 External links Classification The Germanic languages in Europe The Anglo-Frisian languages   English   Scots   West Frisian   North Frisian   Saterland Frisian Phylogenetic tree showing the historical relations between the languages of the West Germanic branch of the Germanic languages English is an Indo-European language, and belongs to the West Germanic group of the Germanic languages.[13] Most closely related to English are the three Frisian languages: West Frisian, North Frisian and Saterland Frisian, with which English forms the Anglo-Frisian subgroup within West Germanic. Low German (Low Saxon) (nr. 19-24 on the map), which evolved from Old Saxon, is also closely related, and sometimes Low German, English, and Frisian are grouped together as the Ingvaeonic (North Sea Germanic) languages.[14] Furthermore, English is closely related to German, Dutch and Afrikaans. While Dutch and Afrikaans are classified as Franconian languages (nr. 25, 29 and 32), Standard German is based on Thuringian-Upper Saxon dialects (nr. 30), and therefore is more closely related to the North Sea Germanic languages. Since the Central German dialects (nr. 29-31) Standard German is based on, were, other than English, Dutch and Afrikaans (and also Low German), affected by the High German consonant shift, German seems more distantly related to English than Dutch and Afrikaans, since cognates often are not so easily recognizable, but still, English and German resemble each other to a high degree: English: The white wise flying ghost was friendly and his best friend was the green frog who sat under the elm and sang. German: Der weiße weise fliegende Geist war freundlich und sein bester Freund war der grüne Frosch der unter der Ulme saß und sang. Modern English descends from Middle English, which in turn descends from Old English.[15] Particular dialects of Old and Middle English also developed into a number of other English (Anglic) languages, including Scots[16] and the extinct Fingallian and Forth and Bargy (Yola) dialects of Ireland.[17] English is classified as a Germanic language because it shares new language features (different from other Indo-European languages) with other Germanic languages such as Dutch, German, and Swedish.[18] These shared innovations show that the languages have descended from a single common ancestor, which linguists call Proto-Germanic. Some shared features of Germanic languages are the use of modal verbs, the division of verbs into strong and weak classes, and the sound changes affecting Proto-Indo-European consonants, known as Grimm's and Verner's laws. Through Grimm's law, the word for foot begins with /f/ in Germanic languages, but its cognates in other Indo-European languages begin with /p/. English is classified as an Anglo-Frisian language because Frisian and English share other features, such as the palatalisation of consonants that were velar consonants in Proto-Germanic (see Phonological history of Old English § Palatalization).[19] English sing, sang, sung; Dutch zingen, zong, gezongen; German singen, sang, gesungen (strong verb) English laugh, laughed; Dutch and German lachen, lachte (weak verb) English foot, Dutch voet, German Fuß, Norwegian and Swedish fot (initial /f/ derived from Proto-Indo-European *p through Grimm's law) Latin pes, stem ped-; Modern Greek ???? pódi; Russian ??? pod; Sanskrit ??? pád (original Proto-Indo-European *p) English cheese, Frisian tsiis (ch and ts from palatalisation) German Käse and Dutch kaas (k without palatalisation) English, like the other insular Germanic languages, Icelandic and Faroese, developed independently of the continental Germanic languages and their influences. English is thus not mutually intelligible with any continental Germanic language, differing in vocabulary, syntax, and phonology, although some, such as Dutch, do show strong affinities with English, especially with its earlier stages.[20] Because English through its history has changed considerably in response to contact with other languages, particularly Old Norse and Norman French, some scholars have argued that English can be considered a mixed language or a creole – a theory called the Middle English creole hypothesis. Although the high degree of influence from these languages on the vocabulary and grammar of Modern English is widely acknowledged, most specialists in language contact do not consider English to be a true mixed language.[21][22] History Main article: History of the English language Proto-Germanic to Old English Main article: Old English The opening to the Old English epic poem Beowulf, handwritten in half-uncial script: H?æt ?? G?rde/na ing?ar dagum þ?od cyninga / þrym ge frunon... "Listen! We of the Spear-Danes from days of yore have heard of the glory of the folk-kings..." The earliest form of English is called Old English or Anglo-Saxon (c. 550–1066 CE). Old English developed from a set of North Sea Germanic dialects originally spoken along the coasts of Frisia, Lower Saxony, Jutland, and Southern Sweden by Germanic tribes known as the Angles, Saxons, and Jutes. In the fifth century, the Anglo-Saxons settled Britain and the Romans withdrew from Britain. By the seventh century, the Germanic language of the Anglo-Saxons became dominant in Britain, replacing the languages of Roman Britain (43–409 CE): Common Brittonic, a Celtic language, and Latin, brought to Britain by the Roman occupation.[23][24][25] England and English (originally Ænglaland and Ænglisc) are named after the Angles.[26] Old English was divided into four dialects: the Anglian dialects, Mercian and Northumbrian, and the Saxon dialects, Kentish and West Saxon.[27] Through the educational reforms of King Alfred in the ninth century and the influence of the kingdom of Wessex, the West Saxon dialect became the standard written variety.[28] The epic poem Beowulf is written in West Saxon, and the earliest English poem, Cædmon's Hymn, is written in Northumbrian.[29] Modern English developed mainly from Mercian, but the Scots language developed from Northumbrian. A few short inscriptions from the early period of Old English were written using a runic script.[30] By the sixth century, a Latin alphabet was adopted, written with half-uncial letterforms. It included the runic letters wynn ??? and thorn ?þ?, and the modified Latin letters eth ?ð?, and ash ?æ?.[30][31] Old English is very different from Modern English and difficult for 21st-century English speakers to understand. Its grammar was similar to that of modern German, and its closest relative is Old Frisian. Nouns, adjectives, pronouns, and verbs had many more inflectional endings and forms, and word order was much freer than in Modern English. Modern English has case forms in pronouns (he, him, his) and a few verb endings (I have, he has), but Old English had case endings in nouns as well, and verbs had more person and number endings.[32][33][34] The translation of Matthew 8:20 from 1000 CE shows examples of case endings (nominative plural, accusative plural, genitive singular) and a verb ending (present plural): Foxas habbað holu and heofonan fuglas nest Fox-as habb-að hol-u and heofon-an fugl-as nest-? fox-NOM.PL have-PRS.PL hole-ACC.PL and heaven-GEN.SG bird-NOM.PL nest-ACC.PL "Foxes have holes and the birds of heaven nests"[35] Middle English Main article: Middle English Englischmen þeyz hy hadde fram þe bygynnyng þre manner speche, Souþeron, Northeron, and Myddel speche in þe myddel of þe lond, … Noþeles by comyxstion and mellyng, furst wiþ Danes, and afterward wiþ Normans, in menye þe contray longage ys asperyed, and som vseþ strange wlaffyng, chyteryng, harryng, and garryng grisbytting. Although, from the beginning, Englishmen had three manners of speaking, southern, northern and midlands speech in the middle of the country, … Nevertheless, through intermingling and mixing, first with Danes and then with Normans, amongst many the country language has arisen, and some use strange stammering, chattering, snarling, and grating gnashing. “ ” John of Trevisa, ca. 1385[36] In the period from the 8th to the 12th century, Old English gradually transformed through language contact into Middle English. Middle English is often arbitrarily defined as beginning with the conquest of England by William the Conqueror in 1066, but it developed further in the period from 1200–1450. First, the waves of Norse colonisation of northern parts of the British Isles in the 8th and 9th centuries put Old English into intense contact with Old Norse, a North Germanic language. Norse influence was strongest in the Northeastern varieties of Old English spoken in the Danelaw area around York, which was the centre of Norse colonisation; today these features are still particularly present in Scots and Northern English. However the centre of norsified English seems to have been in the Midlands around Lindsey, and after 920 CE when Lindsey was reincorporated into the Anglo-Saxon polity, Norse features spread from there into English varieties that had not been in intense contact with Norse speakers. Some elements of Norse influence that persist in all English varieties today are the pronouns beginning with th- (they, them, their) which replaced the Anglo-Saxon pronouns with h- (hie, him, hera).[37] With the Norman conquest of England in 1066, the now norsified Old English language was subject to contact with the Old Norman language, a Romance language closely related to Modern French. The Norman language in England eventually developed into Anglo-Norman. Because Norman was spoken primarily by the elites and nobles, while the lower classes continued speaking Anglo-Saxon, the influence of Norman consisted of introducing a wide range of loanwords related to politics, legislation and prestigious social domains.[38] Middle English also greatly simplified the inflectional system, probably in order to reconcile Old Norse and Old English, which were inflectionally different but morphologically similar. The distinction between nominative and accusative case was lost except in personal pronouns, the instrumental case was dropped, and the use of the genitive case was limited to describing possession. The inflectional system regularised many irregular inflectional forms,[39] and gradually simplified the system of agreement, making word order less flexible.[40] By the Wycliffe Bible of the 1380s, the passage Matthew 8:20 was written Foxis han dennes, and briddis of heuene han nestis[41] Here the plural suffix -n on the verb have is still retained, but none of the case endings on the nouns are present. By the 12th century Middle English was fully developed, integrating both Norse and Norman features; it continued to be spoken until the transition to early Modern English around 1500. Middle English literature includes Geoffrey Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales, and Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur. In the Middle English period the use of regional dialects in writing proliferated, and dialect traits were even used for effect by authors such as Chaucer. Early Modern English Main article: Early Modern English Graphic representation of the Great Vowel Shift, showing how the pronunciation of the long vowels gradually shifted, with the high vowels i: and u: breaking into diphthongs and the lower vowels each shifting their pronunciation up one level The next period in the history of English was Early Modern English (1500–1700). Early Modern English was characterised by the Great Vowel Shift (1350–1700), inflectional simplification, and linguistic standardisation. The Great Vowel Shift affected the stressed long vowels of Middle English. It was a chain shift, meaning that each shift triggered a subsequent shift in the vowel system. Mid and open vowels were raised, and close vowels were broken into diphthongs. For example, the word bite was originally pronounced as the word beet is today, and the second vowel in the word about was pronounced as the word boot is today. The Great Vowel Shift explains many irregularities in spelling, since English retains many spellings from Middle English, and it also explains why English vowel letters have very different pronunciations from the same letters in other languages.[42][43] English began to rise in prestige during the reign of Henry V. Around 1430, the Court of Chancery in Westminster began using English in its official documents, and a new standard form of Middle English, known as Chancery Standard, developed from the dialects of London and the East Midlands. In 1476, William Caxton introduced the printing press to England and began publishing the first printed books in London, expanding the influence of this form of English.[44] Literature from the Early Modern period includes the works of William Shakespeare and the translation of the Bible commissioned by King James I. Even after the vowel shift the language still sounded different from Modern English: for example, the consonant clusters /kn ?n sw/ in knight, gnat, and sword were still pronounced. Many of the grammatical features that a modern reader of Shakespeare might find quaint or archaic represent the distinct characteristics of Early Modern English.[45] In the 1611 King James Version of the Bible, written in Early Modern English, Matthew 8:20 says: The Foxes haue holes and the birds of the ayre haue nests[35] This exemplifies the loss of case and its effects on sentence structure (replacement with Subject-Verb-Object word order, and the use of of instead of the non-possessive genitive), and the introduction of loanwords from French (ayre) and word replacements (bird originally meaning "nestling" had replaced OE fugol). Spread of Modern English By the late 18th century, the British Empire had facilitated the spread of English through its colonies and geopolitical dominance. Commerce, science and technology, diplomacy, art, and formal education all contributed to English becoming the first truly global language. English also facilitated worldwide international communication.[46][47] As England continued to form new colonies, these in turn became independent and developed their own norms for how to speak and write the language. English was adopted in North America, India, parts of Africa, Australasia, and many other regions. In the post-colonial period, some of the newly created nations that had multiple indigenous languages opted to continue using English as the official language to avoid the political difficulties inherent in promoting any one indigenous language above the others.[48][49][50] In the 20th century the growing economic and cultural influence of the United States and its status as a superpower following the Second World War has, along with worldwide broadcasting in English by the BBC[51] and other broadcasters, significantly accelerated the spread of the language across the planet.[52][53] By the 21st century, English was more widely spoken and written than any language has ever been.[54] A major feature in the early development of Modern English was the codification of explicit norms for standard usage, and their dissemination through official media such as public education and state sponsored publications. In 1755 Samuel Johnson published his A Dictionary of the English Language which introduced a standard set of spelling conventions and usage norms. In 1828, Noah Webster published the American Dictionary of the English language in an effort to establish a norm for speaking and writing American English that was independent from the British standard. Within Britain, non-standard or lower class dialect features were increasingly stigmatised, leading to the quick spread of the prestige varieties among the middle classes.[55] In terms of grammatical evolution, Modern English has now reached a stage where the loss of case is almost complete (case is now only found in pronouns, such as he and him, she and her, who and whom), and where SVO word-order is mostly fixed.[55] Some changes, such as the use of do-support have become universalised. (Earlier English did not use the word "do" as a general auxiliary as Modern English does; at first it was only used in question constructions where it was not obligatory.[56] Now, do-support with the verb have is becoming increasingly standardised.) The use of progressive forms in -ing, appears to be spreading to new constructions, and forms such as had been being built are becoming more common. Regularisation of irregular forms also slowly continues (e.g. dreamed instead of dreamt), and analytical alternatives to inflectional forms are becoming more common (e.g. more polite instead of politer). British English is also undergoing change under the influence of American English, fuelled by the strong presence of American English in the media and the prestige associated with the US as a world power. [57][58][59] Geographical distribution See also: List of territorial entities where English is an official language, List of countries by English-speaking population, and English-speaking world Percentage of English speakers by country.   80-100%   60-80%   40-60%   20-40%    0-20%   Not available As of 2016, 400 million people spoke English as their first language, and 1.1 billion spoke it as a secondary language.[60] English is probably the third largest language by number of native speakers, after Mandarin and Spanish.[8] However, when combining native and non-native speakers it may, depending on the estimate used, be the most commonly spoken language in the world.[54][61][62][63] English is spoken by communities on every continent and on oceanic islands in all the major oceans.[64] The countries in which English is spoken can be grouped into different categories by how English is used in each country. The "inner circle"[65] countries with many native speakers of English share an international standard of written English and jointly influence speech norms of English around the world. English does not belong to just one country, and it does not belong solely to descendants of English settlers. English is an official language of countries populated by few descendants of native speakers of English. It has also become by far the most important language of international communication when people who share no native language meet anywhere in the world. Three circles of English-speaking countries Braj Kachru distinguishes countries where English is spoken with a three circles model.[65] In his model, the "inner circle" countries are countries with large communities of native speakers of English, "outer circle" countries have small communities of native speakers of English but widespread use of English as a second language in education or broadcasting or for local official purposes, and "expanding circle" countries are countries where many learners learn English as a foreign language. Kachru bases his model on the history of how English spread in different countries, how users acquire English, and the range of uses English has in each country. The three circles change membership over time.[66] Braj Kachru's Three Circles of English. Countries with large communities of native speakers of English (the inner circle) include Britain, the United States, Australia, Canada, Ireland, and New Zealand, where the majority speaks English, and South Africa, where a significant minority speaks English. The countries with the most native English speakers are, in descending order, the United States (at least 231 million),[67] the United Kingdom (60 million),[68][69][70] Canada (19 million),[71] Australia (at least 17 million),[72] South Africa (4.8 million),[73] Ireland (4.2 million), and New Zealand (3.7 million).[74] In these countries, children of native speakers learn English from their parents, and local people who speak other languages or new immigrants learn English to communicate in their neighbourhoods and workplaces.[75] The inner-circle countries provide the base from which English spreads to other countries in the world.[66] Estimates of the number of English speakers who are second language and foreign-language speakers vary greatly from 470 million to more than 1,000 million depending on how proficiency is defined.[7] Linguist David Crystal estimates that non-native speakers now outnumber native speakers by a ratio of 3 to 1.[61] In Kachru's three-circles model, the "outer circle" countries are countries such as the Philippines,[76] Jamaica,[77] India, Pakistan[citation needed], Singapore,[78] and Nigeria[79][80] with a much smaller proportion of native speakers of English but much use of English as a second language for education, government, or domestic business, and where English is routinely used for school instruction and official interactions with the government.[81] Those countries have millions of native speakers of dialect continua ranging from an English-based creole to a more standard version of English. They have many more speakers of English who acquire English in the process of growing up through day by day use and listening to broadcasting, especially if they attend schools where English is the medium of instruction. Varieties of English learned by speakers who are not native speakers born to English-speaking parents may be influenced, especially in their grammar, by the other languages spoken by those learners.[75] Most of those varieties of English include words little used by native speakers of English in the inner-circle countries,[75] and they may have grammatical and phonological differences from inner-circle varieties as well. The standard English of the inner-circle countries is often taken as a norm for use of English in the outer-circle countries.[75] In the three-circles model, countries such as Poland, China, Brazil, Germany, Japan, Indonesia, Egypt, and other countries where English is taught as a foreign language make up the "expanding circle".[82] The distinctions between English as a first language, as a second language, and as a foreign language are often debatable and may change in particular countries over time.[81] For example, in the Netherlands and some other countries of Europe, knowledge of English as a second language is nearly universal, with over 80 percent of the population able to use it,[83] and thus English is routinely used to communicate with foreigners and often in higher education. In these countries, although English is not used for government business, the widespread use of English in these countries puts them at the boundary between the "outer circle" and "expanding circle". English is unusual among world languages in how many of its users are not native speakers but speakers of English as a second or foreign language.[84] Many users of English in the expanding circle use it to communicate with other people from the expanding circle, so that interaction with native speakers of English plays no part in their decision to use English.[85] Non-native varieties of English are widely used for international communication, and speakers of one such variety often encounter features of other varieties.[86] Very often today a conversation in English anywhere in the world may include no native speakers of English at all, even while including speakers from several different countries.[87] Pie chart showing the percentage of native English speakers living in "inner circle" English-speaking countries. Native speakers are now substantially outnumbered worldwide by second-language speakers of English (not counted in this chart).   US (64.3%)   UK (16.7%)   Canada (5.3%)   Australia (4.7%)   South Africa (1.3%)   Ireland (1.1%)   New Zealand (1%)   Other (5.6%) Pluricentric English English is a pluricentric language, which means that no one national authority sets the standard for use of the language.[88][89][90][91] But English is not a divided language,[92] despite a long-standing joke originally attributed to George Bernard Shaw that the United Kingdom and the United States are "two countries separated by a common language".[93] Spoken English, for example English used in broadcasting, generally follows national pronunciation standards that are also established by custom rather than by regulation. International broadcasters are usually identifiable as coming from one country rather than another through their accents,[94] but newsreader scripts are also composed largely in international standard written English. The norms of standard written English are maintained purely by the consensus of educated English-speakers around the world, without any oversight by any government or international organisation.[95] American listeners generally readily understand most British broadcasting, and British listeners readily understand most American broadcasting. Most English speakers around the world can understand radio programmes, television programmes, and films from many parts of the English-speaking world.[96] Both standard and nonstandard varieties of English can include both formal or informal styles, distinguished by word choice and syntax and use both technical and non-technical registers.[97] The settlement history of the English-speaking inner circle countries outside Britain helped level dialect distinctions and produce koineised forms of English in South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand.[98] The majority of immigrants to the United States without British ancestry rapidly adopted English after arrival. Now the majority of the United States population are monolingual English speakers,[99][67] although English has been given official status by only 30 of the 50 state governments of the US.[100][101] English as a global language English has ceased to be an "English language" in the sense of belonging only to people who are ethnically English.[102][103] Use of English is growing country-by-country internally and for international communication. Most people learn English for practical rather than ideological reasons.[104] Many speakers of English in Africa have become part of an "Afro-Saxon" language community that unites Africans from different countries.[105] As decolonisation proceeded throughout the British Empire in the 1950s and 1960s, former colonies often did not reject English but rather continued to use it as independent countries setting their own language policies.[49][50][106] For example, the view of the English language among many Indians has gone from associating it with colonialism to associating it with economic progress, and English continues to be an official language of India.[107] English is also widely used in media and literature, and the number of English language books published annually in India is the third largest in the world after the US and UK.[108] However English is rarely spoken as a first language, numbering only around a couple hundred-thousand people, and less than 5% of the population speak fluent English in India.[109][110] David Crystal claimed in 2004 that, combining native and non-native speakers, India now has more people who speak or understand English than any other country in the world,[111] but the number of English speakers in India is very uncertain, with most scholars concluding that the United States still has more speakers of English than India.[112] Modern English, sometimes described as the first global lingua franca,[52][113] is also regarded as the first world language.[114][115] English is the world's most widely used language in newspaper publishing, book publishing, international telecommunications, scientific publishing, international trade, mass entertainment, and diplomacy.[115] English is, by international treaty, the basis for the required controlled natural languages[116] Seaspeak and Airspeak, used as international languages of seafaring[117] and aviation.[118] English used to have parity with French & German in scientific research, but now it dominates that field.[119] It achieved parity with French as a language of diplomacy at the Treaty of Versailles negotiations in 1919.[120] By the time of the foundation of the United Nations at the end of World War II, English had become pre-eminent [121] and is now the main worldwide language of diplomacy and international relations.[122] It is one of six official languages of the United Nations.[123] Many other worldwide international organisations, including the International Olympic Committee, specify English as a working language or official language of the organisation. Many regional international organisations such as the European Free Trade Association, Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),[53] and Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) set English as their organisation's sole working language even though most members are not countries with a majority of native English speakers. While the European Union (EU) allows member states to designate any of the national languages as an official language of the Union, in practice English is the main working language of EU organisations.[124] Although in most countries English is not an official language, it is currently the language most often taught as a foreign language.[52][53] In the countries of the EU, English is the most widely spoken foreign language in nineteen of the twenty-five member states where it is not an official language (that is, the countries other than the UK, Ireland and Malta). In a 2012 official Eurobarometer poll, 38 percent of the EU respondents outside the countries where English is an official language said they could speak English well enough to have a conversation in that language. The next most commonly mentioned foreign language, French (which is the most widely known foreign language in the UK and Ireland), could be used in conversation by 12 percent of respondents.[125] A working knowledge of English has become a requirement in a number of occupations and professions such as medicine[126] and computing. English has become so important in scientific publishing that more than 80 percent of all scientific journal articles indexed by Chemical Abstracts in 1998 were written in English, as were 90 percent of all articles in natural science publications by 1996 and 82 percent of articles in humanities publications by 1995.[127] Specialised subsets of English arise spontaneously in international communities, for example, among international business people, as an auxiliary language. This has led some scholars to develop the study of English as an auxiliary languages. Globish uses a relatively small subset of English vocabulary (about 1500 words with highest use in international business English) in combination with the standard English grammar. Other examples include Simple English. The increased use of the English language globally has had an effect on other languages, leading to some English words being assimilated into the vocabularies of other languages. This influence of English has led to concerns about language death,[128] and to claims of linguistic imperialism,[129] and has provoked resistance to the spread of English; however the number of speakers continues to increase because many people around the world think that English provides them with opportunities for better employment and improved lives.[130] Although some scholars mention a possibility of future divergence of English dialects into mutually unintelligible languages, most think a more likely outcome is that English will continue to function as a koineised language in which the standard form unifies speakers from around the world.[131] English is used as the language for wider communication in countries around the world.[132] Thus English has grown in worldwide use much more than any constructed language proposed as an international auxiliary language, including Esperanto.[133][134] Phonology Main article: English phonology The phonetics and phonology of English differ between dialects, usually without interfering with mutual communication. Phonological variation affects the inventory of phonemes (speech sounds that distinguish meaning), and phonetic variation is differences in pronunciation of the phonemes.[135] This overview mainly describes the standard pronunciations of the United Kingdom and the United States: Received Pronunciation (RP) and General American (GA) (See Section below on "Dialects, accents and varieties"). The phonetic symbols used below are from the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA).[136][137][138] Consonants Main article: English phonology § Consonants Most English dialects share the same 24 consonant phonemes. The consonant inventory shown below is valid for Californian American English,[139] and for RP.[140] Consonant phonemes Labial Dental Alveolar Post- alveolar Palatal Velar Glottal Nasal m n ? Stop p b t d k ? Affricate t? d? Fricative f v ? ð s z ? ? h Approximant ?* j w Lateral l * Conventionally transcribed /r/. In the table, when obstruents (stops, affricates, and fricatives) appear in pairs, such as /p b/, /t? d?/, and /s z/, the first is fortis (strong) and the second is lenis (weak). Fortis obstruents, such as /p t? s/ are pronounced with more muscular tension and breath force than lenis consonants, such as /b d? z/, and are always voiceless. Lenis consonants are partly voiced at the beginning and end of utterances, and fully voiced between vowels. Fortis stops such as /p/ have additional articulatory or acoustic features in most dialects: they are aspirated [p?] when they occur alone at the beginning of a stressed syllable, often unaspirated in other cases, and often unreleased [p? ] or pre-glottalised [?p] at the end of a syllable. In a single-syllable word, a vowel before a fortis stop is shortened: thus nip has a noticeably shorter vowel (phonetically, but not phonemically) than nib [n??p?] (see below).[141] lenis stops: bin [b???n], about [??ba?t], nib [n??b?] fortis stops: pin [?p??n], spin [sp?n], happy [?hæpi], nip [?nip? ] or [?ni?p] In RP, the lateral approximant /l/, has two main allophones (pronunciation variants): the clear or plain [l], as in light, and the dark or velarised [?], as in full.[142] GA has dark l in most cases.[143] clear l: RP light [la?t] dark l: RP and GA full [f??], GA light [?a?t] All sonorants (liquids /l, r/ and nasals /m, n, ?/) devoice when following a voiceless obstruent, and they are syllabic when following a consonant at the end of a word.[144] voiceless sonorants: clay [?kl????] and snow [?sn?o?] syllabic sonorants: paddle [pad.l?], and button [b?t.n?] Vowels Main article: English phonology § Vowels The pronunciation of vowels varies a great deal between dialects and is one of the most detectable aspects of a speaker's accent. The table below lists the vowel phonemes in Received Pronunciation (RP) and General American (GA), with examples of words in which they occur from lexical sets compiled by linguists. The vowels are represented with symbols from the International Phonetic Alphabet; those given for RP are standard in British dictionaries and other publications. monophthongs RP GA word i? i need ? bid e ? bed æ back monophthongs RP GA word (?) ? roses ? comma ?? ?r bird ? but monophthongs RP GA word u? u food ? good ?? ? paw ? cloth ? box ?? bra diphthongs RP GA word e? bay ?? o? road a? cry a? cow ?? boy In RP, vowel length is phonemic; long vowels are marked with a triangular colon ??? in the table above, such as the vowel of need [ni?d] as opposed to bid [b?d]. GA does not have long vowels. In both RP and GA, vowels are phonetically shortened before fortis consonants in the same syllable, like /t t? f/, but not before lenis consonants like /d d? v/ or in open syllables: thus, the vowels of rich [r??t?], neat [ni?t], and safe [s???f] are noticeably shorter than the vowels of ridge [r?d?], need [ni?d], and save [se?v], and the vowel of light [l???t] is shorter than that of lie [la?]. Because lenis consonants are frequently voiceless at the end of a syllable, vowel length is an important cue as to whether the following consonant is lenis or fortis.[145] The vowels /? ?/ only occur in unstressed syllables and are a result of vowel reduction. Some dialects do not distinguish them, so that roses and comma end in the same vowel, a dialect feature called weak-vowel merger. GA has an unstressed r-coloured schwa /?/, as in butter [?b?t?], which in RP has the same vowel as the word-final vowel in comma. Phonotactics An English syllable includes a syllable nucleus consisting of a vowel sound. Syllable onset and coda (start and end) are optional. A syllable can start with up to three consonant sounds, as in sprint /spr?nt/, and end with up to four, as in texts /teksts/. This gives an English syllable the following structure, (CCC)V(CCCC) where C represents a consonant and V a vowel. The consonants that may appear together in onsets or codas are restricted, as is the order in which they may appear. Onsets can only have four types of consonant clusters: a stop and approximant, as in play; a voiceless fricative and approximant, as in fly or sly; s and a voiceless stop, as in stay; and s, a voiceless stop, and an approximant, as in string.[146] Clusters of nasal and stop are only allowed in codas. Clusters of obstruents always agree in voicing, and clusters of sibilants and of plosives with the same point of articulation are prohibited. Furthermore, several consonants have limited distributions: /h/ can only occur in syllable initial position, and /?/ only in syllable final position.[147] Stress, rhythm and intonation See also: Stress and vowel reduction in English and Intonation in English Stress plays an important role in English. Certain syllables are stressed, while others are unstressed. Stress is a combination of duration, intensity, vowel quality, and sometimes changes in pitch. Stressed syllables are pronounced longer and louder than unstressed syllables, and vowels in unstressed syllables are frequently reduced while vowels in stressed syllables are not.[148] Some words, primarily short function words but also some modal verbs such as can, have weak and strong forms depending on whether they occur in stressed or non-stressed position within a sentence. Stress in English is phonemic, and some pairs of words are distinguished by stress. For instance, the word contract is stressed on the first syllable (/?k?ntrækt/ KON-trakt) when used as a noun, but on the last syllable (/k?n?trækt/ k?n-TRAKT) for most meanings (for example, "reduce in size") when used as a verb.[149][150][151] Here stress is connected to vowel reduction: in the noun "contract" the first syllable is stressed and has the unreduced vowel /?/, but in the verb "contract" the first syllable is unstressed and its vowel is reduced to /?/. Stress is also used to distinguish between words and phrases, so that a compound word receives a single stress unit, but the corresponding phrase has two: e.g. to búrn óut versus a búrnout, and a hótdog versus a hót dóg.[152] In terms of rhythm, English is generally described as a stress-timed language, meaning that the amount of time between stressed syllables tends to be equal. Stressed syllables are pronounced longer, but unstressed syllables (syllables between stresses) are shortened. Vowels in unstressed syllables are shortened as well, and vowel shortening causes changes in vowel quality: vowel reduction. Regional variation Varieties of Standard English and their features[153] Phonological features United States Canada Republic of Ireland Northern Ireland Scotland England Wales South Africa Australia New Zealand father–bother merger yes yes /?/ is unrounded yes yes yes /??r/ is pronounced [?] yes yes yes yes cot–caught merger possibly yes possibly yes yes fool–full merger yes yes /t?d/ flapping (latter-ladder merger) yes yes possibly often rarely rarely rarely rarely yes often trap–bath split possibly possibly yes yes yes often yes non-rhotic (/r/-dropping after vowels) yes yes yes yes yes close vowels for /æ, ?/ yes yes yes /l/ can always be pronounced [?] yes yes yes yes yes yes /??r/ is fronted possibly yes yes Dialects and low vowels word RP GA Can sound change THOUGHT /?/ /?/ or /?/ /?/ cot–caught merger CLOTH /?/ lot–cloth split LOT /?/ father–bother merger PALM /??/ PLANT /æ/ /æ/ trap–bath split BATH TRAP /æ/ Varieties of English vary the most in pronunciation of vowels. The best known national varieties used as standards for education in non English-speaking countries are British (BrE) and American (AmE). Countries such as Canada, Australia, Ireland, New Zealand and South Africa have their own standard varieties which are less often used as standards for education internationally. Some differences between the various dialects are shown in the table "Varieties of Standard English and their features".[153] English has undergone many historical sound changes, some of them affecting all varieties, and others affecting only a few. Most standard varieties are affected by the Great Vowel Shift, which changed the pronunciation of long vowels, but a few dialects have slightly different results. In North America, a number of chain shifts such as the Northern Cities Vowel Shift and Canadian Shift have produced very different vowel landscapes in some regional accents. Some dialects have fewer or more consonant phonemes and phones than the standard varieties. Some conservative varieties like Scottish English have a voiceless [?] sound in whine that contrasts with the voiced [w] in wine, but most other dialects pronounce both words with voiced [w], a dialect feature called wine–whine merger. The unvoiced velar fricative sound /x/ is found in Scottish English, which distinguishes loch /l?x/ from lock /l?k/. Accents like Cockney with "h-dropping" lack the glottal fricative /h/, and dialects with th-stopping and th-fronting like African American Vernacular and Estuary English do not have the dental fricatives /?, ð/, but replace them with dental or alveolar stops /t, d/ or labiodental fricatives /f, v/.[154][155] Other changes affecting the phonology of local varieties are processes such as yod-dropping, yod-coalescence, and reduction of consonant clusters. General American and Received Pronunciation vary in their pronunciation of historical /r/ after a vowel at the end of a syllable (in the syllable coda). GA is a rhotic dialect, meaning that it pronounces /r/ at the end of a syllable, but RP is non-rhotic, meaning that it loses /r/ in that position. English dialects are classified as rhotic or non-rhotic depending on whether they elide /r/ like RP or keep it like GA.[156] There is complex dialectal variation in words with the open front and open back vowels /æ ?? ? ??/. These four vowels are only distinguished in RP, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. In GA, these vowels merge to three /æ ? ?/,[157] and in Canadian English they merge to two /æ ?/.[158] In addition, the words that have each vowel vary by dialect. The table "Dialects and open vowels" shows this variation with lexical sets in which these sounds occur. Grammar Main article: English grammar As is typical of an Indo-European language, English follows accusative morphosyntactic alignment. English distinguishes at least seven major word classes: verbs, nouns, adjectives, adverbs, determiners (i.e. articles), prepositions, and conjunctions. Some analyses add pronouns as a class separate from nouns, and subdivide conjunctions into subordinators and coordinators, and add the class of interjections.[159] English also has a rich set of auxiliary verbs, such as have and do, expressing the categories of mood and aspect. Questions are marked by do-support, wh-movement (fronting of question words beginning with wh-) and word order inversion with some verbs. Some traits typical of Germanic languages persist in English, such as the distinction between irregularly inflected strong stems inflected through ablaut (i.e. changing the vowel of the stem, as in the pairs speak/spoke and foot/feet) and weak stems inflected through affixation (such as love/loved, hand/hands). Vestiges of the case and gender system are found in the pronoun system (he/him, who/whom) and in the inflection of the copula verb to be. The seven word classes are exemplified in this sample sentence:[160] The chairman of the committee and the loquacious politician clashed violently when the meeting started Det. Noun Prep. Det. Noun Conj. Det. Adj. Noun Verb Advb. Conj. Det. Noun Verb Nouns and noun phrases English nouns are only inflected for number and possession. New nouns can be formed through derivation or compounding. They are semantically divided into proper nouns (names) and common nouns. Common nouns are in turn divided into concrete and abstract nouns, and grammatically into count nouns and mass nouns.[161] Most count nouns are inflected for plural number through the use of the plural suffix -s, but a few nouns have irregular plural forms. Mass nouns can only be pluralised through the use of a count noun classifier, e.g. one loaf of bread, two loaves of bread.[162] Regular plural formation: Singular: cat, dog Plural: cats, dogs Irregular plural formation: Singular: man, woman, foot, fish, ox, knife, mouse Plural: men, women, feet, fish, oxen, knives, mice Possession can be expressed either by the possessive enclitic -s (also traditionally called a genitive suffix), or by the preposition of. Historically the -s possessive has been used for animate nouns, whereas the of possessive has been reserved for inanimate nouns. Today this distinction is less clear, and many speakers use -s also with inanimates. Orthographically the possessive -s is separated from the noun root with an apostrophe. Possessive constructions: With -s: The woman's husband's child With of: The child of the husband of the woman Nouns can form noun phrases (NPs) where they are the syntactic head of the words that depend on them such as determiners, quantifiers, conjunctions or adjectives.[163] Noun phrases can be short, such as the man, composed only of a determiner and a noun. They can also include modifiers such as adjectives (e.g. red, tall, all) and specifiers such as determiners (e.g. the, that). But they can also tie together several nouns into a single long NP, using conjunctions such as and, or prepositions such as with, e.g. the tall man with the long red trousers and his skinny wife with the spectacles (this NP uses conjunctions, prepositions, specifiers and modifiers). Regardless of length, an NP functions as a syntactic unit. For example, the possessive enclitic can, in cases which do not lead to ambiguity, follow the entire noun phrase, as in The President of India's wife, where the enclitic follows India and not President. The class of determiners is used to specify the noun they precede in terms of definiteness, where the marks a definite noun and a or an an indefinite one. A definite noun is assumed by the speaker to be already known by the interlocutor, whereas an indefinite noun is not specified as being previously known. Quantifiers, which include one, many, some and all, are used to specify the noun in terms of quantity or number. The noun must agree with the number of the determiner, e.g. one man (sg.) but all men (pl.). Determiners are the first constituents in a noun phrase.[164] Adjectives Adjectives modify a noun by providing additional information about their referents. In English, adjectives come before the nouns they modify and after determiners.[165] In Modern English, adjectives are not inflected, and they do not agree in form with the noun they modify, as adjectives in most other Indo-European languages do. For example, in the phrases the slender boy, and many slender girls, the adjective slender does not change form to agree with either the number or gender of the noun. Some adjectives are inflected for degree of comparison, with the positive degree unmarked, the suffix -er marking the comparative, and -est marking the superlative: a small boy, the boy is smaller than the girl, that boy is the smallest. Some adjectives have irregular comparative and superlative forms, such as good, better, and best. Other adjectives have comparatives formed by periphrastic constructions, with the adverb more marking the comparative, and most marking the superlative: happier or more happy, the happiest or most happy.[166] There is some variation among speakers regarding which adjectives use inflected or periphrastic comparison, and some studies have shown a tendency for the periphrastic forms to become more common at the expense of the inflected form.[167] Pronouns, case and person English pronouns conserve many traits of case and gender inflection. The personal pronouns retain a difference between subjective and objective case in most persons (I/me, he/him, she/her, we/us, they/them) as well as a gender and animateness distinction in the third person singular (distinguishing he/she/it). The subjective case corresponds to the Old English nominative case, and the objective case is used both in the sense of the previous accusative case (in the role of patient, or direct object of a transitive verb), and in the sense of the Old English dative case (in the role of a recipient or indirect object of a transitive verb).[168][169] Subjective case is used when the pronoun is the subject of a finite clause, and otherwise the objective case is used.[170] While grammarians such as Henry Sweet[171] and Otto Jespersen[172] noted that the English cases did not correspond to the traditional Latin based system, some contemporary grammars, for example Huddleston & Pullum (2002), retain traditional labels for the cases, calling them nominative and accusative cases respectively. Possessive pronouns exist in dependent and independent forms; the dependent form functions as a determiner specifying a noun (as in my chair), while the independent form can stand alone as if it were a noun (e.g. the chair is mine).[173] The English system of grammatical person no longer has a distinction between formal and informal pronouns of address, and the forms for 2nd person plural and singular are identical except in the reflexive form. Some dialects have introduced innovative 2nd person plural pronouns such as y'all found in Southern American English and African American (Vernacular) English or youse and ye found in Irish English. English personal pronouns Person Subjective case Objective case Dependent possessive Independent possessive Reflexive 1st p. sg. I me my mine myself 2nd o. sg. you you your yours yourself 3rd p. sg. he/she/it him/her/it his/her/its his/hers/its himself/herself/itself 1st p. pl. we us our ours ourselves 2nd p. pl. you you your yours yourselves 3rd p. pl they them their theirs themselves Pronouns are used to refer to entities deictically or anaphorically. A deictic pronoun points to some person or object by identifying it relative to the speech situation — for example the pronoun I identifies the speaker, and the pronoun you, the addressee. Anaphorical pronouns such as that refer back to an entity already mentioned or assumed by the speaker to be known by the audience, for example in the sentence I already told you that. The reflexive pronouns are used when the oblique argument is identical to the subject of a phrase (e.g. "he sent it to himself" or "she braced herself for impact").[174] Prepositions Prepositional phrases (PP) are phrases composed of a preposition and one or more nouns, e.g. with the dog, for my friend, to school, in England. Prepositions have a wide range of uses in English. They are used to describe movement, place, and other relations between different entities, but they also have many syntactic uses such as introducing complement clauses and oblique arguments of verbs. For example, in the phrase I gave it to him, the preposition to marks the recipient, or Indirect Object of the verb to give. Traditionally words were only considered prepositions if they governed the case of the noun they preceded, for example causing the pronouns to use the objective rather than subjective form, "with her", "to me", "for us". But some contemporary grammars such as that of Huddleston & Pullum (2002:598–600) no longer consider government of case to be the defining feature of the class of prepositions, rather defining prepositions as words that can function as the heads of prepositional phrases. Verbs and verb phrases English verbs are inflected for tense and aspect, and marked for agreement with third person singular subject. Only the copula verb to be is still inflected for agreement with the plural and first and second person subjects.[166] Auxiliary verbs such as have and be are paired with verbs in the infinitive, past, or progressive forms. They form complex tenses, aspects, and moods. Auxiliary verbs differ from other verbs in that they can be followed by the negation, and in that they can occur as the first constituent in a question sentence.[175][176] Most verbs have six inflectional forms. The primary forms are a plain present, a third person singular present, and a preterite (past) form. The secondary forms are a plain form used for the infinitive, a gerund–participle and a past participle.[177] The copula verb to be is the only verb to retain some of its original conjugation, and takes different inflectional forms depending on the subject. The first person present tense form is am, the third person singular form is and the form are is used second person singular and all three plurals. The only verb past participle is been and its gerund-participle is being. English inflectional forms Inflection Strong Regular Plain present take love 3rd person sg. present takes loves Preterite took loved Plain (infinitive) take love Gerund–participle taking loving Past participle taken loved Tense, aspect and mood English has two primary tenses, past (preterit) and non-past. The preterit is inflected by using the preterit form of the verb, which for the regular verbs includes the suffix -ed, and for the strong verbs either the suffix -t or a change in the stem vowel. The non-past form is unmarked except in the third person singular, which takes the suffix -s.[175] Present Preterite First person I run I ran Second person You run You ran Third person John runs John ran English does not have a morphologised future tense.[178] Futurity of action is expressed periphrastically with one of the auxiliary verbs will or shall.[179] Many varieties also use a near future constructed with the phrasal verb be going to.[180] Future First person I will run Second person You will run Third person John will run Further aspectual distinctions are encoded by the use of auxiliary verbs, primarily have and be, which encode the contrast between a perfect and non-perfect past tense (I have run vs. I was running), and compound tenses such as preterite perfect (I had been running) and present perfect (I have been running).[181] For the expression of mood, English uses a number of modal auxiliaries, such as can, may, will, shall and the past tense forms could, might, would, should. There is also a subjunctive and an imperative mood, both based on the plain form of the verb (i.e. without the third person singular -s), and which is used in subordinate clauses (e.g. subjunctive: It is important that he run every day; imperative Run!).[179] An infinitive form, that uses the plain form of the verb and the preposition to, is used for verbal clauses that are syntactically subordinate to a finite verbal clause. Finite verbal clauses are those that are formed around a verb in the present or preterit form. In clauses with auxiliary verbs they are the finite verbs and the main verb is treated as a subordinate clause. For example, he has to go where only the auxiliary verb have is inflected for time and the main verb to go is in the infinitive, or in a complement clause such as I saw him leave, where the main verb is to see which is in a preterite form, and leave is in the infinitive. Phrasal verbs English also makes frequent use of constructions traditionally called phrasal verbs, verb phrases that are made up of a verb root and a preposition or particle which follows the verb. The phrase then functions as a single predicate. In terms of intonation the preposition is fused to the verb, but in writing it is written as a separate word. Examples of phrasal verbs are to get up, to ask out, to back up, to give up, to get together, to hang out, to put up with, etc. The phrasal verb frequently has a highly idiomatic meaning that is more specialised and restricted than what can be simply extrapolated from the combination of verb and preposition complement (e.g. lay off meaning terminate someone's employment).[182] In spite of the idiomatic meaning, some grammarians, including Huddleston & Pullum (2002):274, do not consider this type of construction to form a syntactic constituent and hence refrain from using the term "phrasal verb". Instead they consider the construction simply to be a verb with a prepositional phrase as its syntactic complement, i.e. he woke up in the morning and he ran up in the mountains are syntactically equivalent. Adverbs The function of adverbs is to modify the action or event described by the verb by providing additional information about the manner in which it occurs. Many adverbs are derived from adjectives with the suffix -ly, but not all, and many speakers tend to omit the suffix in the most commonly used adverbs. For example, in the phrase the woman walked quickly the adverb quickly derived from the adjective quick describes the woman's way of walking. Some commonly used adjectives have irregular adverbial forms, such as good which has the adverbial form well. Syntax In the English sentence The cat sat on the mat, the subject is the cat (a NP), the verb is sat, and on the mat is a prepositional phrase (composed of an NP the mat, and headed by the preposition on). The tree describes the structure of the sentence. Modern English syntax language is moderately analytic.[183] It has developed features such as modal verbs and word order as resources for conveying meaning. Auxiliary verbs mark constructions such as questions, negative polarity, the passive voice and progressive aspect. Basic constituent order English word order has moved from the Germanic verb-second (V2) word order to being almost exclusively subject–verb–object (SVO).[184] The combination of SVO order and use of auxiliary verbs often creates clusters of two or more verbs at the centre of the sentence, such as he had hoped to try to open it. In most sentences English only marks grammatical relations through word order.[185] The subject constituent precedes the verb and the object constituent follows it. The example below demonstrates how the grammatical roles of each constituent is marked only by the position relative to the verb: The dog bites the man S V O The man bites the dog S V O An exception is found in sentences where one of the constituents is a pronoun, in which case it is doubly marked, both by word order and by case inflection, where the subject pronoun precedes the verb and takes the subjective case form, and the object pronoun follows the verb and takes the objective case form. The example below demonstrates this double marking in a sentence where both object and subject is represented with a third person singular masculine pronoun: He hit him S V O Indirect objects (IO) of ditransitive verbs can be placed either as the first object in a double object construction (S V IO O), such as I gave Jane the book or in a prepositional phrase, such as I gave the book to Jane [186] Clause syntax Main article: English clause syntax In English a sentence may be composed of one or more clauses, that may in turn be composed of one or more phrases (e.g. Noun Phrases, Verb Phrases, and Prepositional Phrases). A clause is built around a verb, and includes its constituents, such as any NPs and PPs. Within a sentence one clause is always the main clause (or matrix clause) whereas other clauses are subordinate to it. Subordinate clauses may function as arguments of the verb in the main clause. For example, in the phrase I think (that) you are lying, the main clause is headed by the verb think, the subject is I, but the object of the phrase is the subordinate clause (that) you are lying. The subordinating conjunction that shows that the clause that follows is a subordinate clause, but it is often omitted.[187] Relative clauses are clauses that function as a modifier or specifier to some constituent in the main clause: For example, in the sentence I saw the letter that you received today, the relative clause that you received today specifies the meaning of the word letter, the object of the main clause. Relative clauses can be introduced by the pronouns who, whose, whom and which as well as by that (which can also be omitted.)[188] In contrast to many other Germanic languages there is no major differences between word order in main and subordinate clauses.[189] Auxiliary verb constructions Main articles: Do-support and Subject–auxiliary inversion English syntax relies on auxiliary verbs for many functions including the expression of tense, aspect and mood. Auxiliary verbs form main clauses, and the main verbs function as heads of a subordinate clause of the auxiliary verb. For example, in the sentence the dog did not find its bone, the clause find its bone is the complement of the negated verb did not. Subject–auxiliary inversion is used in many constructions, including focus, negation, and interrogative constructions. The verb do can be used as an auxiliary even in simple declarative sentences, where it usually serves to add emphasis, as in "I did shut the fridge." However, in the negated and inverted clauses referred to above, it is used because the rules of English syntax permit these constructions only when an auxiliary is present. Modern English does not allow the addition of the negating adverb not to an ordinary finite lexical verb, as in *I know not—it can only be added to an auxiliary (or copular) verb, hence if there is no other auxiliary present when negation is required, the auxiliary do is used, to produce a form like I do not (don't) know. The same applies in clauses requiring inversion, including most questions—inversion must involve the subject and an auxiliary verb, so it is not possible to say *Know you him?; grammatical rules require Do you know him?[190] Negation is done with the adverb not, which precedes the main verb and follows an auxiliary verb. A contracted form of not -n't can be used as an enclitic attaching to auxiliary verbs and to the copula verb to be. Just as with questions, many negative constructions require the negation to occur with do-support, thus in Modern English I don't know him is the correct answer to the question Do you know him?, but not *I know him not, although this construction may be found in older English.[191] Passive constructions also use auxiliary verbs. A passive construction rephrases an active construction in such a way that the object of the active phrase becomes the subject of the passive phrase, and the subject of the active phrase is either omitted or demoted to a role as an oblique argument introduced in a prepositional phrase. They are formed by using the past participle either with the auxiliary verb to be or to get, although not all varieties of English allow the use of passives with get. For example, putting the sentence she sees him into the passive becomes he is seen (by her), or he gets seen (by her).[192] Questions Both yes–no questions and wh-questions in English are mostly formed using subject–auxiliary inversion (Am I going tomorrow?, Where can we eat?), which may require do-support (Do you like her?, Where did he go?). In most cases, interrogative words (wh-words; e.g. what, who, where, when, why, how) appear in a fronted position. For example, in the question What did you see?, the word what appears as the first constituent despite being the grammatical object of the sentence. (When the wh-word is the subject or forms part of the subject, no inversion occurs: Who saw the cat?.) Prepositional phrases can also be fronted when they are the question's theme, e.g. To whose house did you go last night?. The personal interrogative pronoun who is the only interrogative pronoun to still show inflection for case, with the variant whom serving as the objective case form, although this form may be going out of use in many contexts.[193] Discourse level syntax At the discourse level English tends to use a topic-comment structure, where the known information (topic) precedes the new information (comment). Because of the strict SVO syntax, the topic of a sentence generally has to be the grammatical subject of the sentence. In cases where the topic is not the grammatical subject of the sentence, frequently the topic is promoted to subject position through syntactic means. One way of doing this is through a passive construction, the girl was stung by the bee. Another way is through a cleft sentence where the main clause is demoted to be a complement clause of a copula sentence with a dummy subject such as it or there, e.g. it was the girl that the bee stung, there was a girl who was stung by a bee.[194] Dummy subjects are also used in constructions where there is no grammatical subject such as with impersonal verbs (e.g., it is raining) or in existential clauses (there are many cars on the street). Through the use of these complex sentence constructions with informationally vacuous subjects, English is able to maintain both a topic comment sentence structure and a SVO syntax. Focus constructions emphasise a particular piece of new or salient information within a sentence, generally through allocating the main sentence level stress on the focal constituent. For example, the girl was stung by a bee (emphasising it was a bee and not for example a wasp that stung her), or The girl was stung by a bee (contrasting with another possibility, for example that it was the boy).[195] Topic and focus can also be established through syntactic dislocation, either preposing or postposing the item to be focused on relative to the main clause. For example, That girl over there, she was stung by a bee, emphasises the girl by preposition, but a similar effect could be achieved by postposition, she was stung by a bee, that girl over there, where reference to the girl is established as an "afterthought".[196] Cohesion between sentences is achieved through the use of deictic pronouns as anaphora (e.g. that is exactly what I mean where that refers to some fact known to both interlocutors, or then used to locate the time of a narrated event relative to the time of a previously narrated event).[197] Discourse markers such as oh, so or well, also signal the progression of ideas between sentences and help to create cohesion. Discourse markers are often the first constituents in sentences. Discourse markers are also used for stance taking in which speakers position themselves in a specific attitude towards what is being said, for example, no way is that true! (the idiomatic marker no way! expressing disbelief), or boy! I'm hungry (the marker boy expressing emphasis). While discourse markers are particularly characteristic of informal and spoken registers of English, they are also used in written and formal registers.[198] Vocabulary The vocabulary of English is vast, and counting exactly how many words English (or any language) has is impossible.[199][200][201] The Oxford Dictionaries suggest that there are at least a quarter of a million distinct English words.[199] Early studies of English vocabulary by lexicographers, the scholars who formally study vocabulary, compile dictionaries, or both, were impeded by a lack of comprehensive data on actual vocabulary in use from good-quality linguistic corpora,[202] collections of actual written texts and spoken passages. Many statements published before the end of the 20th century about the growth of English vocabulary over time, the dates of first use of various words in English, and the sources of English vocabulary will have to be corrected as new computerised analysis of linguistic corpus data becomes available.[201][203] Word formation processes English forms new words from existing words or roots in its vocabulary through a variety of processes. One of the most productive processes in English is conversion,[204] using a word with a different grammatical role, for example using a noun as a verb or a verb as a noun. Another productive word-formation process is nominal compounding,[201][203] producing compound words such as babysitter or ice cream or homesick.[204] A process more common in Old English than in Modern English, but still productive in Modern English, is the use of derivational suffixes (-hood, -ness, -ing, -ility) to derive new words from existing words (especially those of Germanic origin) or stems (especially for words of Latin or Greek origin). Formation of new words, called neologisms, based on Greek or Latin roots (for example television or optometry) is a highly productive process in English and in most modern European languages, so much so that it is often difficult to determine in which language a neologism originated. For this reason, lexicographer Philip Gove attributed many such words to the "international scientific vocabulary" (ISV) when compiling Webster's Third New International Dictionary (1961). Another active word-formation process in English is acronyms,[205] words formed by pronouncing as a single word abbreviations of longer phrases (e.g. NATO, laser). Word origins Main article: Lists of English loanwords by country or language of origin Source languages of English vocabulary[6][206] English, besides forming new words from existing words and their roots, also borrows words from other languages. This process of adding words from other languages is commonplace in many world languages, but English is characterised as being especially open to borrowing of foreign words throughout the last 1,000 years.[207] The most commonly used words in English are West Germanic.[208] The words in English learned first by children as they learn to speak, particularly the grammatical words that dominate the word count of both spoken and written texts, are the Germanic words inherited from the earliest periods of the development of Old English.[201] But one of the consequences of long language contact between French and English in all stages of their development is that the vocabulary of English has a very high percentage of "Latinate" words (derived from French, especially, and also from Latin or from other Romance languages).[209] French words from various periods of the development of French now make up one-third of the vocabulary of English.[210] English has also borrowed many words directly from Latin, the ancestor of the Romance languages, during all stages of its development.[203][201] Many of these words were earlier borrowed into Latin from Greek. Latin or Greek are still highly productive sources of stems used to form vocabulary of subjects learned in higher education such as the sciences, philosophy, and mathematics.[211] English continues to gain new loanwords and calques ("loan translations") from languages all over the world, and words from languages other than the ancestral Anglo-Saxon language make up about 60 percent of the vocabulary of English.[212] English has formal and informal speech registers, and informal registers, including child directed speech, tend to be made up predominantly of words of Anglo-Saxon origin, while the percentage of vocabulary that is of Latinate origin is higher in legal, scientific, and academic texts.[213][214] English loanwords and calques in other languages English has a strong influence on the vocabulary of other languages.[210][215] The influence of English comes from such factors as opinion leaders in other countries knowing the English language, the role of English as a world lingua franca, and the large number of books and films that are translated from English into other languages.[216] That pervasive use of English leads to a conclusion in many places that English is an especially suitable language for expressing new ideas or describing new technologies. Among varieties of English, it is especially American English that influences other languages.[217] Some languages, such as Chinese, write words borrowed from English mostly as calques, while others, such as Japanese, readily take in English loanwords written in sound-indicating script.[218] Dubbed films and television programmes are an especially fruitful source of English influence on languages in Europe.[218] Writing system See also: English alphabet, English braille, and English orthography Since the ninth century, English has been written in a Latin alphabet (also called Roman alphabet). Earlier Old English texts in Anglo-Saxon runes are only short inscriptions. The great majority of literary works in Old English that survive to today are written in the Roman alphabet.[30] The modern English alphabet contains 26 letters of the Latin script: a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, t, u, v, w, x, y, z (which also have capital forms: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W, X, Y, Z). The spelling system, or orthography, of English is multi-layered, with elements of French, Latin, and Greek spelling on top of the native Germanic system.[219] Further complications have arisen through sound changes with which the orthography has not kept pace.[42] Compared to European languages for which official organisations have promoted spelling reforms, English has spelling that is a less consistent indicator of pronunciation and standard spellings of words that are more difficult to guess from knowing how a word is pronounced.[220] There are also systematic spelling differences between British and American English. These situations have prompted proposals for spelling reform in English.[221] Although letters and speech sounds do not have a one-to-one correspondence in standard English spelling, spelling rules that take into account syllable structure, phonetic changes in derived words, and word accent are reliable for most English words.[222] Moreover, standard English spelling shows etymological relationships between related words that would be obscured by a closer correspondence between pronunciation and spelling, for example the words photograph, photography, and photographic,[222] or the words electricity and electrical. While few scholars agree with Chomsky and Halle (1968) that conventional English orthography is "near-optimal",[219] there is a rationale for current English spelling patterns.[223] The standard orthography of English is the most widely used writing system in the world.[224] Standard English spelling is based on a graphomorphemic segmentation of words into written clues of what meaningful units make up each word.[225] Readers of English can generally rely on the correspondence between spelling and pronunciation to be fairly regular for letters or digraphs used to spell consonant sounds. The letters b, d, f, h, j, k, l, m, n, p, r, s, t, v, w, y, z represent, respectively, the phonemes /b, d, f, h, d?, k, l, m, n, p, r, s, t, v, w, j, z/. The letters c and g normally represent /k/ and /?/, but there is also a soft c pronounced /s/, and a soft g pronounced /d?/. The differences in the pronunciations of the letters c and g are often signalled by the following letters in standard English spelling. Digraphs used to represent phonemes and phoneme sequences include ch for /t?/, sh for /?/, th for /?/ or /ð/, ng for /?/, qu for /kw/, and ph for /f/ in Greek-derived words. The single letter x is generally pronounced as /z/ in word-initial position and as /ks/ otherwise. There are exceptions to these generalisations, often the result of loanwords being spelled according to the spelling patterns of their languages of origin[222] or proposals by pedantic scholars in the early period of Modern English to mistakenly follow the spelling patterns of Latin for English words of Germanic origin.[226] For the vowel sounds of the English language, however, correspondences between spelling and pronunciation are more irregular. There are many more vowel phonemes in English than there are vowel letters (a, e, i, o, u, w, y). As a result of a smaller set of single letter symbols than the set of vowel phonemes, some "long vowels" are often indicated by combinations of letters (like the oa in boat, the ow in how, and the ay in stay), or the historically based silent e (as in note and cake).[223] The consequence of this complex orthographic history is that learning to read can be challenging in English. It can take longer for school pupils to become independently fluent readers of English than of many other languages, including Italian, Spanish, or German.[227] Nonetheless, there is an advantage for learners of English reading in learning the specific sound-symbol regularities that occur in the standard English spellings of commonly used words.[222] Such instruction greatly reduces the risk of children experiencing reading difficulties in English.[228][229] Making primary school teachers more aware of the primacy of morpheme representation in English may help learners learn more efficiently to read and write English.[230] English writing also includes a system of punctuation that is similar to the system of punctuation marks used in most alphabetic languages around the world. The purpose of punctuation is to mark meaningful grammatical relationships in sentences to aid readers in understanding a text and to indicate features important for reading a text aloud.[231] Dialects, accents, and varieties Main articles: List of dialects of the English language, World Englishes, and regional accents of English Dialectologists distinguish between English dialects, regional varieties that differ from each other in terms of grammar and vocabulary, and regional accents, distinguished by different patterns of pronunciation. The major native dialects of English are often divided by linguists into the two general categories of the British dialects (BrE) and those of North America (AmE).[232] There also exists a grouping of major native varieties of English in the southern hemisphere, the most prominent being Australian and New Zealand English. UK and Ireland See also: English language in England, Northern England English, Scots language, Scottish English, Welsh English, Estuary English, Ulster English, and Hiberno-English Map showing the main dialect regions in the UK and Ireland As the place where English first evolved, the British Isles, and particularly England, are home to the most variegated pattern of dialects. Within the United Kingdom, the Received Pronunciation (RP), an educated dialect of South East England, is traditionally used as the broadcast standard, and is considered the most prestigious of the British dialects. The spread of RP (also known as BBC English) through the media has caused many traditional dialects of rural England to recede, as youths adopt the traits of the prestige variety instead of traits from local dialects. At the time of the Survey of English Dialects, grammar and vocabulary differed across the country, but a process of lexical attrition has led most of this variation to disappear.[233] Nonetheless this attrition has mostly affected dialectal variation in grammar and vocabulary, and in fact only 3 percent of the English population actually speak RP, the remainder speaking regional accents and dialects with varying degrees of RP influence.[234] There is also variability within RP, particularly along class lines between Upper and Middle class RP speakers and between native RP speakers and speakers who adopt RP later in life.[235] Within Britain there is also considerable variation along lines of social class, and some traits though exceedingly common are considered "non-standard" and are associated with lower class speakers and identities. An example of this is H-dropping, which was historically a feature of lower class London English, particularly Cockney, but which today is the standard in all major English cities—yet it remains largely absent in broadcasting and among the upper crust of British society.[236] Speech example An example of an Essex male with a working-class Estuary accent (entertainer Russell Brand) Problems playing this file? See media help. English in England can be divided into four major dialect regions, Southwest English, South East English, Midlands English, and Northern English. Within each of these regions several local subdialects exist: Within the Northern region, there is a division between the Yorkshire dialects, and the Geordie dialect spoken in Northumbria around Newcastle, and the Lancashire dialects with local urban dialects in Liverpool (Scouse) and Manchester (Mancunian). Having been the centre of Danish occupation during the Viking Invasions, Northern English dialects, particularly the Yorkshire dialect, retain Norse features not found in other English varieties.[237] Since the 15th century, Southeastern varieties centred around London, which has been the centre from which dialectal innovations have spread to other dialects. In London, the Cockney dialect was traditionally used by the lower classes, and it was long a socially stigmatised variety. Today a large area of Southeastern England has adopted traits from Cockney, resulting in the so-called Estuary English which spread in areas south and East of London beginning in the 1980s. Estuary English is distinguished by traits such as the use of intrusive R (drawing is pronounced drawring /?dr??r??/), t-glottalisation (Potter is pronounced with a glottal stop as Po'er /po??/), and the pronunciation of th- as /f/ (thanks pronounced fanks) or /v/ (bother pronounced bover). [238] Speech example An example of a Scottish male with a middle-class Renfrewshire accent Problems playing this file? See media help. Scots is today considered a separate language from English, but it has its origins in early Northern Middle English[239] and developed and changed during its history with influence from other sources, particularly Scots Gaelic and Old Norse. Scots itself has a number of regional dialects. And in addition to Scots, Scottish English are the varieties of Standard English spoken in Scotland, most varieties are Northern English accents, with some influence from Scots.[240] In Ireland, various forms of English have been spoken since the Norman invasions of the 11th century. In County Wexford, in the area surrounding Dublin, two highly conservative dialects known as Forth and Bargy and Fingallian developed as offshoots from Early Middle English, and were spoken until the 19th century. Modern Hiberno-English however has its roots in English colonisation in the 17th century. Today Irish English is divided into Ulster English, a dialect with strong influence from Scots, and southern Hiberno-English. Like Scots and Northern English, the Irish accents preserve the rhoticity which has been lost in most dialects influenced by RP.[17][241] North America Main articles: American English, General American, African American Vernacular English, Southern American English, and Canadian English Rhoticity dominates in North American English. The Atlas of North American English found over 50% non-rhoticity, though, in at least one local white speaker in each U.S. metropolitan area designated here by a red dot. Non-rhotic African American Vernacular English pronunciations may be found among African Americans regardless of location. American English is fairly homogeneous compared to British English. Today, American accent variation is often increasing at the regional level and decreasing at the very local level,[242] though most Americans still speak within a phonological continuum of similar accents,[243] known collectively as General American (GA), with differences hardly noticed even among Americans themselves (such as Midland and Western American English).[244][245][246] In most American and Canadian English, rhoticity (or r-fulness) is dominant, with non-rhoticity (r-dropping) becoming associated with lower prestige and social class especially after World War II; this contrasts with the situation in England, where non-rhoticity has become the standard.[247] Separate from GA are American dialects with clearly distinct sound systems, historically including Southern American English, English of the coastal Northeast (famously including Eastern New England English and New York City English), and African American Vernacular English, all of which are historically non-rhotic. Canadian English, except for the Atlantic provinces and perhaps Quebec, may be classified under GA as well, but it often shows raising of certain vowels, /a?/ and /a?/, before voiceless consonants, as well as distinct norms for written and pronunciation standards.[248] In Southern American English, the largest American "accent group" outside of GA,[249] rhoticity now strongly prevails, replacing the region's historical non-rhotic prestige.[250][251][252] Southern accents are colloquially described as a "drawl" or "twang,"[253] being recognised most readily by the Southern Vowel Shift that begins with glide-deleting in the /a?/ vowel (e.g. pronouncing spy almost like spa), the "Southern breaking" of several front pure vowels into a gliding vowel or even two syllables (e.g. pronouncing the word "press" almost like "pray-us"),[254] the pin–pen merger, and other distinctive phonological, grammatical, and lexical features, many of which are actually recent developments of the 19th century or later.[255] Today spoken primarily by working- and middle-class African Americans, African American Vernacular English (AAVE) is also largely non-rhotic and likely originated among enslaved Africans and African Americans influenced primarily by the non-rhotic, non-standard English dialects of the Old South. A minority of linguists,[256] contrarily, propose that AAVE mostly traces back to African languages spoken by the slaves who had to develop a pidgin or Creole English to communicate with slaves of other ethnic and linguistic origins.[257] AAVE shares important commonalities with older Southern American English and so probably developed to a highly coherent and homogeneous variety in the 19th or early 20th century. AAVE is commonly stigmatised in North America as a form of "broken" or "uneducated" English, also common of modern Southern American English, but linguists today recognise both as fully developed varieties of English with their own norms shared by a large speech community.[258][259] Australia and New Zealand Main articles: Australian English and New Zealand English Since 1788, English has been spoken in Oceania, and Australian English has developed as a first language of the vast majority of the inhabitants of the Australian continent, its standard accent being General Australian. The English of neighbouring New Zealand has to a lesser degree become an influential standard variety of the language.[260] Australian and New Zealand English are most closely related to each other with few differentiating characteristics, followed by South African English and the English of southeastern England, all of which have similarly non-rhotic accents, aside from some accents in the South Island of New Zealand. Australian and New Zealand English stand out for their innovative vowels: many short vowels are fronted or raised, whereas many long vowels have diphthongised. Australian English also has a contrast between long and short vowels, not found in most other varieties. Australian English grammar aligns closely to British and American English; like American English, collective plural subjects take on a singular verb (as in the government is rather than are).[261][262] New Zealand English uses [?] for ?wh-? and its front vowels are often even higher than in Australian English.[263][264][265] Africa, the Caribbean, and South Asia See also: South African English, Caribbean English, and Indian English English is spoken widely in South Africa and is an official or co-official language in several countries. In South Africa, English has been spoken since 1820, co-existing with Afrikaans and various African languages such as the Khoe and Bantu languages. Today about 9 percent of the South African population speak South African English (SAE) as a first language. SAE is a non-rhotic variety, which tends to follow RP as a norm. It is alone among non-rhotic varieties in lacking intrusive r. There are different L2 varieties that differ based on the native language of the speakers.[266] Most phonological differences from RP are in the vowels.[267] Consonant differences include the tendency to pronounce /p, t, t??, k/ without aspiration (e.g. pin pronounced [p?n] rather than as [p??n] as in most other varieties), while r is often pronounced as a flap [?] instead of as the more common fricative.[268] Several varieties of English are also spoken in the Caribbean Islands that were colonial possessions of Britain, including Jamaica, and the Leeward and Windward Islands and Trinidad and Tobago, Barbados, the Cayman Islands, and Belize. Each of these areas are home both to a local variety of English and a local English based creole, combining English and African languages. The most prominent varieties are Jamaican English and Jamaican Creole. In Central America, English based creoles are spoken in on the Caribbean coasts of Nicaragua and Panama. [269] Locals are often fluent both in the local English variety and the local creole languages and code-switching between them is frequent, indeed another way to conceptualise the relationship between Creole and Standard varieties is to see a spectrum of social registers with the Creole forms serving as "basilect" and the more RP-like forms serving as the "acrolect", the most formal register.[270] Most Caribbean varieties are based on British English and consequently most are non-rhotic, except for formal styles of Jamaican English which are often rhotic. Jamaican English differs from RP in its vowel inventory, which has a distinction between long and short vowels rather than tense and lax vowels as in Standard English. The diphthongs /ei/ and /ou/ are monophthongs [e?] and [o?] or even the reverse diphthongs [ie] and [uo] (e.g. bay and boat pronounced [b?e?] and [b?o?t]). Often word final consonant clusters are simplified so that "child" is pronounced [t??ail] and "wind" [win].[271][272][273] As a historical legacy, Indian English tends to take RP as its ideal, and how well this ideal is realised in an individual's speech reflects class distinctions among Indian English speakers. Indian English accents are marked by the pronunciation of phonemes such as /t/ and /d/ (often pronounced with retroflex articulation as [?] and [?]) and the replacement of /?/ and /ð/ with dentals [t?] and [d?]. Sometimes Indian English speakers may also use spelling based pronunciations where the silent ?h? found in words such as ghost is pronounced as an Indian voiced aspirated stop [??].[274] References ^ OxfordLearner'sDictionary 2015, Entry: English – Pronunciation. ^ a b Crystal 2006, pp. 424–426. ^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin; Bank, Sebastian, eds. (2016). "Standard English". Glottolog 2.7. Jena: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History.  ^ Crystal 2003a, p. 6. ^ Wardhaugh 2010, p. 55. ^ a b Finkenstaedt, Thomas; Dieter Wolff (1973). Ordered profusion; studies in dictionaries and the English lexicon. C. Winter. ISBN 3-533-02253-6.  ^ a b Crystal 2003b, pp. 108–109. ^ a b Ethnologue 2010. ^ Crystal 2003b, p. 30. ^ "How English evolved into a global language". BBC. 20 December 2010. Retrieved 9 August 2015.  ^ The Routes of English 2015. ^ König 1994, p. 539. ^ Bammesberger 1992, pp. 29–30. ^ Bammesberger 1992, p. 30. ^ Robinson 1992. ^ Romaine 1982, pp. 56–65. ^ a b Barry 1982, pp. 86–87. ^ Durrell 2006. ^ König & van der Auwera 1994. ^ Harbert 2007. ^ Thomason & Kaufman 1988, pp. 264–265. ^ Watts 2011, Chapter 4. ^ Collingwood & Myres 1936. ^ Graddol, Leith & Swann et al. 2007. ^ Blench & Spriggs 1999. ^ Bosworth & Toller 1921. ^ Campbell 1959, p. 4. ^ Toon 1992, Chapter: Old English Dialects. ^ Donoghue 2008. ^ a b c Gneuss 2013, p. 23. ^ Denison & Hogg 2006, pp. 30–31. ^ Hogg 1992, Chapter 3. Phonology and Morphology. ^ Smith 2009. ^ Trask & Trask 2010. ^ a b Lass 2006, pp. 46–47. ^ Hogg 2006, pp. 360–361. ^ Thomason & Kaufman 1988, pp. 284–290. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 39. ^ Lass 1992. ^ Fischer & van der Wurff 2006, pp. 111–13. ^ Wycliffe, John. "Bible" (PDF). Wesley NNU.  ^ a b Lass 2000. ^ Görlach 1991, pp. 66–70. ^ Nevalainen & Tieken-Boon van Ostade 2006, pp. 274–79. ^ Cercignani 1981. ^ How English evolved into a global language 2010. ^ The Routes of English. ^ Romaine 2006, p. 586. ^ a b Mufwene 2006, p. 614. ^ a b Northrup 2013, pp. 81–86. ^ Baker, Colin (August 1998). "Encyclopedia of Bilingualism and Bilingual Education, page CCCXI". Multilingual Matters Ltd. Retrieved 9 August 2015.  ^ a b c Graddol 2006. ^ a b c Crystal 2003a. ^ a b McCrum, MacNeil & Cran 2003, pp. 9–10. ^ a b Romaine 1999, pp. 1–56. ^ Romaine 1999, p. 2. ^ Leech et al. 2009, pp. 18–19. ^ Mair & Leech 2006. ^ Mair 2006. ^ "Which countries are best at English as a second language?". World Economic Forum. Retrieved 29 November 2016.  ^ a b Crystal 2003a, p. 69. ^ "English". Ethnologue. Retrieved 2016-10-29.  ^ "Chinese, Mandarin". Ethnologue. Retrieved 2016-10-29.  ^ Crystal 2003b, p. 106. ^ a b Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 2. ^ a b Kachru 2006, p. 196. ^ a b Ryan 2013, Table 1. ^ Office for National Statistics 2013, Key Points. ^ National Records of Scotland 2013. ^ Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency 2012, Table KS207NI: Main Language. ^ Statistics Canada 2014. ^ Australian Bureau of Statistics 2013. ^ Statistics South Africa 2012, Table 2.5 Population by first language spoken and province (number). ^ Statistics New Zealand 2014. ^ a b c d Bao 2006, p. 377. ^ Rubino 2006. ^ Patrick 2006a. ^ Lim & Ansaldo 2006. ^ Connell 2006. ^ Schneider 2007. ^ a b Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 5. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 4. ^ European Commission 2012. ^ Kachru 2006, p. 197. ^ Kachru 2006, p. 198. ^ Bao 2006. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 7. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 2. ^ Romaine 1999. ^ Baugh & Cable 2002. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, pp. 8–9. ^ Ammon 2008, p. 1539. ^ Marsh, David (26 November 2010). "Lickety splits: two nations divided by a common language". The Guardian (UK). Retrieved 26 December 2015.  ^ Trudgill 2006. ^ Ammon 2008, pp. 1537–1539. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 122. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, pp. 5–6. ^ Deumert 2006, p. 130. ^ Deumert 2006, p. 131. ^ Crawford, James (1 February 2012). "Language Legislation in the U.S.A.". languagepolicy.net. Retrieved 29 May 2013.  ^ "States with Official English Laws". us-english.org. Retrieved 29 May 2013.  ^ Romaine 1999, p. 5. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 1. ^ Kachru 2006, p. 195. ^ Mazrui & Mazrui 1998. ^ Mesthrie 2010, p. 594. ^ Annamalai 2006. ^ Sailaja 2009, pp. 2–9. ^ "Indiaspeak: English is our 2nd language – The Times of India". The Times of India. Retrieved 5 January 2016.  ^ "Human Development in India: Challenges for a Society in Transition" (PDF). Oxford University Press. 2005. Retrieved 5 January 2016.  ^ Crystal 2004b. ^ Graddol 2010. ^ Meierkord 2006, p. 165. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006, p. 690–91. ^ a b Northrup 2013. ^ Wojcik 2006, p. 139. ^ International Maritime Organization 2011. ^ International Civil Aviation Organization 2011. ^ Gordin 2015. ^ Phillipson 2004, p. 47. ^ ConradRubal-Lopez 1996, p. 261. ^ Richter 2012, p. 29. ^ United Nations 2008. ^ Ammon 2006, p. 321. ^ European Commission 2012, pp. 21, 19. ^ Alcaraz Ariza & Navarro 2006. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006, p. 694–95. ^ Crystal 2002. ^ Jambor 2007. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, Chapter 12: English into the Future. ^ Crystal 2006. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006. ^ Li 2003. ^ Meierkord 2006, p. 163. ^ Wolfram 2006, pp. 334–335. ^ Carr & Honeybone 2007. ^ Bermúdez-Otero & McMahon 2006. ^ MacMahon 2006. ^ International Phonetic Association 1999, pp. 41–42. ^ König 1994, p. 534. ^ Collins & Mees 2003, pp. 47–53. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 13. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 41. ^ Brinton & Brinton 2010, pp. 56–59. ^ Collins & Mees 2003, pp. 46–50. ^ Brinton & Brinton 2010, p. 60. ^ König 1994, pp. 537–538. ^ International Phonetic Association 1999, p. 42. ^ Oxford Learner's Dictionary 2015, Entry "contract". ^ Merriam Webster 2015, Entry "contract". ^ Macquarie Dictionary 2015, Entry "contract". ^ Brinton & Brinton 2010, p. 66. ^ a b Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 4–6. ^ Roach 2009, p. 53. ^ Giegerich 1992, p. 36. ^ Lass 2000, p. 114. ^ Wells 1982, pp. xviii-xix. ^ Wells 1982, p. 493. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 22. ^ Aarts & Haegeman (2006), p. 118. ^ Payne & Huddleston 2002. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 56–57. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 55. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 54–5. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 57. ^ a b König 1994, p. 540. ^ Mair 2006, pp. 148–49. ^ Leech 2006, p. 69. ^ O'Dwyer 2006. ^ Greenbaum & Nelson 2002. ^ Sweet 2014, p. 52. ^ Jespersen 2007. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 425–26. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 426. ^ a b Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 51. ^ König 1994, p. 541. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 50. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 208–210. ^ a b Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 51–52. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 210–11. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 50–51. ^ Dixon 1982. ^ McArthur 1992, pp. 64, 610–611. ^ König 1994, p. 553. ^ König 1994, p. 550. ^ König 1994, p. 551. ^ Miller 2002, pp. 60–69. ^ König 1994, p. 545. ^ König 1994, p. 557. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 114. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 786–790. ^ Miller 2002, pp. 26–27. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 7-8. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 1365–70. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 1370. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 1366. ^ Halliday & Hasan 1976. ^ Schiffrin 1988. ^ a b HowManyWords 2015. ^ Sheidlower 2006. ^ a b c d e Algeo 1999. ^ Leech et al. 2009, pp. 24–50. ^ a b c Kastovsky 2006. ^ a b Crystal 2003b, p. 129. ^ Crystal 2003b, pp. 120–121. ^ "Joseph M. Willams, Origins of the English Language at". Amazon.com. Retrieved 2010-04-21.  ^ Denning, Kessler & Leben 2007, p. 7. ^ Nation 2001, p. 265. ^ Denning, Kessler & Leben 2007. ^ a b Gottlieb 2006, p. 196. ^ Romaine 1999, p. 4. ^ Fasold & Connor-Linton 2014, p. 302. ^ Crystal 2003b, pp. 124–127. ^ Algeo 1999, pp. 80–81. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006, p. 692. ^ Gottlieb 2006, p. 197. ^ Gottlieb 2006, p. 198. ^ a b Gottlieb 2006, p. 202. ^ a b Swan 2006, p. 149. ^ Mountford 2006. ^ Neijt 2006. ^ a b c d Daniels & Bright 1996, p. 653. ^ a b Abercrombie & Daniels 2006. ^ Mountford 2006, p. 156. ^ Mountford 2006, pp. 157–158. ^ Daniels & Bright 1996, p. 654. ^ Dehaene 2009. ^ McGuinness 1997. ^ Shaywitz 2003. ^ Mountford 2006, pp. 159. ^ Lawler 2006, p. 290. ^ Crystal 2003b, p. 107. ^ Trudgill 2000, p. 125. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 3. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 37. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 40. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 31. ^ Trudgill 2000, pp. 80–81. ^ Aitken & McArthur 1979, p. 81. ^ Romaine 1982. ^ Hickey 2007. ^ Labov 2012. ^ Wells 1982, p. 34. ^ Rowicka 2006. ^ Toon 1982. ^ Cassidy 1982. ^ Labov 1972. ^ Boberg 2010. ^ "Do You Speak American: What Lies Ahead". PBS. Retrieved 15 August 2007.  ^ Thomas, Erik R. (2003), "Rural White Southern Accents" (PDF), Atlas of North American English (online), Mouton de Gruyter, p. 16. [Later published as a chapter in: Bernd Kortmann and Edgar W. Schneider (eds) (2004). A Handbook of Varieties of English: A Multimedia Reference Tool. New York: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 300-324.]  ^ Levine & Crockett 1966. ^ Schönweitz 2001. ^ Montgomery 1993. ^ Thomas 2008, p. 95–96. ^ Bailey 1997. ^ McWhorter, John H. (2001). Word on the Street: Debunking the Myth of a "Pure" Standard English. Basic Books. p. 162.  ^ Bailey 2001. ^ Green 2002. ^ Patrick 2006b. ^ Eagleson 1982. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 16–21. ^ Burridge 2010. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 24–26. ^ Maclagan 2010. ^ Gordon, Campbell & Hay et al. 2004. ^ Lanham 1982. ^ Lass 2002. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 30–31. ^ Lawton 1982. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, p. 115. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 117–18. ^ Lawton 1982, p. 256–60. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 115–16. ^ Sailaja 2009, pp. 19–24. Bibliography Aarts, Bas; Haegeman, Liliane (2006). "6. English Word classes and Phrases". In Aarts, Bas; McMahon, April. The Handbook of English Linguistics. Blackwell Publishing Ltd.  Abercrombie, D.; Daniels, Peter T. (2006). "Spelling Reform Proposals: English". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04878-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Aitken, A. J.; McArthur, Tom, eds. (1979). Languages of Scotland. Occasional paper – Association for Scottish Literary Studies; no. 4. Edinburgh: Chambers. ISBN 978-0-550-20261-1.  Alcaraz Ariza, M. Á.; Navarro, F. (2006). "Medicine: Use of English". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 752–759. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/02351-8. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Algeo, John (1999). "Chapter 2:Vocabulary". In Romaine, Suzanne. Cambridge History of the English Language. IV: 1776–1997. Cambridge University Press. pp. 57–91. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521264778.003. ISBN 978-0-521-26477-8.  Ammon, Ulrich (November 2006). "Language Conflicts in the European Union: On finding a politically acceptable and practicable solution for EU institutions that satisfies diverging interests". International Journal of Applied Linguistics. 16 (3): 319–338. doi:10.1111/j.1473-4192.2006.00121.x.  Ammon, Ulrich (2008). "Pluricentric and Divided Languages". In Ammon, Ulrich N.; Dittmar, Norbert; Mattheier, Klaus J.; et al. Sociolinguistics: An International Handbook of the Science of Language and Society / Soziolinguistik Ein internationales Handbuch zur Wissenschaft vov Sprache and Gesellschaft. Handbooks of Linguistics and Communication Science / Handbücher zur Sprach- und Kommunikationswissenschaft 3/2. 2 (2nd completely revised and extended ed.). de Gruyter. ISBN 978-3-11-019425-8. Retrieved 19 December 2014 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Annamalai, E. (2006). "India: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 610–613. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04611-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Australian Bureau of Statistics (28 March 2013). "2011 Census QuickStats: Australia". Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Bailey, Guy (2001). "Chapter 3: The relationship between African American and White Vernaculars". In Lanehart, Sonja L. Sociocultural and historical contexts of African American English. Varieties of English around the World. John Benjamins. pp. 53–84. ISBN 978-1-58811-046-6.  Bailey, G. (1997). "When did southern American English begin". In Edgar W. Schneider. Englishes around the world. pp. 255–275.  Bammesberger, Alfred (1992). "Chapter 2: The Place of English in Germanic and Indo-European". In Hogg, Richard M. The Cambridge History of the English Language. 1: The Beginnings to 1066. Cambridge University Press. pp. 26–66. ISBN 978-0-521-26474-7.  Bao, Z. (2006). "Variation in Nonnative Varieties of English". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 377–380. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04257-7. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Barry, Michael V. (1982). "English in Ireland". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 84–134. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Bauer, Laurie; Huddleston, Rodney (15 April 2002). "Chapter 19: Lexical Word-Formation". In Huddleston, Rodney; Pullum, Geoffrey K. The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 1621–1721. ISBN 978-0-521-43146-0. Retrieved 10 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (10 February 2015).  Baugh, Albert C.; Cable, Thomas (2002). A History of the English Language (5th ed.). Longman. ISBN 978-0-13-015166-7.  Bermúdez-Otero, Ricardo; McMahon, April (2006). "Chapter 17: English phonology and morphology". In Bas Aarts; April McMahon. The Handbook of English Linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 382–410. doi:10.1111/b.9781405113823.2006.00018.x. ISBN 978-1-4051-6425-2. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  Blench, R.; Spriggs, Matthew (1999). Archaeology and Language: Correlating Archaeological and Linguistic Hypotheses. Routledge. pp. 285–286. ISBN 978-0-415-11761-6.  Boberg, Charles (2010). The English language in Canada: Status, history and comparative analysis. Studies in English Language. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-139-49144-0. Lay summary (2 April 2015).  Bosworth, Joseph; Toller, T. Northcote (1921). "Engla land". An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary (Online). Charles University. Retrieved 6 March 2015.  Brinton, Laurel J.; Brinton, Donna M. (2010). The linguistic structure of modern English. John Benjamins. ISBN 978-902728824-0. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  Brutt-Griffler, J. (2006). "Languages of Wider Communication". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 690–697. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00644-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Burridge, Kate (2010). "Chapter 7: English in Australia". In Kirkpatrick, Andy. The Routledge handbook of world Englishes. Routledge. pp. 132–151. ISBN 978-0-415-62264-6. Lay summary (29 March 2015).  Campbell, Alistair (1959). Old English Grammar. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-811943-7.  Carr, Philip; Honeybone, Patrick (2007). "English phonology and linguistic theory: an introduction to issues, and to 'Issues in English Phonology'". Language Sciences. 29 (2): 117–153. doi:10.1016/j.langsci.2006.12.018. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Cassidy, Frederic G. (1982). "Geographical Variation of English in the United States". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 177–210. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Cercignani, Fausto (1981). Shakespeare's works and Elizabethan pronunciation. Clarendon Press. Retrieved 14 March 2015. Lay summary (15 March 2015).  Collingwood, Robin George; Myres, J. N. L. (1936). "Chapter XX. The Sources for the period: Angles, Saxons, and Jutes on the Continent". Roman Britain and the English Settlements. Book V: The English Settlements. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press. LCCN 37002621. Lay summary (15 March 2015).  Collins, Beverley; Mees, Inger M. (2003) [First published 1981]. The Phonetics of English and Dutch (PDF) (5th ed.). Leiden: Brill Publishers. ISBN 9004103406.  Connell, B. A. (2006). "Nigeria: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 88–90. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01655-2. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 25 March 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Conrad, Andrew W.; Rubal-Lopez, Alma (1 January 1996). Post-Imperial English: Status Change in Former British and American Colonies, 1940–1990. de Gruyter. p. 261. ISBN 978-3-11-087218-7. Retrieved 2 April 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Crystal, David (2002). Language Death. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139106856. ISBN 978-1-139-10685-6. Retrieved 25 February 2015.  Crystal, David (2003a). English as a Global Language (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 69. ISBN 978-0-521-53032-3. Retrieved 4 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) – Library of Congress (sample) (4 February 2015).  Crystal, David (2003b). The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-53033-4. Retrieved 4 February 2015. Lay summary (4 February 2015).  Crystal, David (2004). "Subcontinent Raises Its Voice". The Guardian. Retrieved 4 February 2015.  Crystal, David (2006). "Chapter 9: English worldwide". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 420–439. ISBN 978-0-511-16893-2.  Daniels, Peter T.; Bright, William, eds. (6 June 1996). The World's Writing Systems. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-507993-7. Retrieved 23 February 2015. Lay summary (23 February 2015).  Dehaene, Stanislas (2009). Reading in the Brain: The Science and Evolution of a Human Invention. Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-02110-9. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Lay summary (3 April 2015).  Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. (2006). "Overview". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 30–31. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Denning, Keith; Kessler, Brett; Leben, William Ronald (17 February 2007). English Vocabulary Elements. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-516803-7. Retrieved 25 February 2015. Lay summary (25 February 2015).  Department for Communities and Local Government (United Kingdom) (27 February 2007). Second Report submitted by the United Kingdom pursuant to article 25, paragraph 1 of the framework convention for the protection of national minorities (PDF) (Report). Council of Europe. ACFC/SR/II(2007)003 rev1. Retrieved 6 March 2015.  Deumert, A. (2006). "Migration and Language". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 129–133. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01294-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Dixon, R. M. W. (1982). "The grammar of English phrasal verbs". Australian Journal of Linguistics. 2 (1): 1–42. doi:10.1080/07268608208599280.  Donoghue, D. (2008). Old English Literature: A Short Introduction. Wiley. doi:10.1002/9780470776025. ISBN 978-0-631-23486-9. Retrieved 16 March 2015.  Durrell, M. (2006). "Germanic Languages". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 53–55. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/02189-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Eagleson, Robert D. (1982). "English in Australia and New Zealand". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 415–438. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  "Summary by language size". Ethnologue: Languages of the World. Retrieved 10 February 2015.  European Commission (June 2012). Special Eurobarometer 386: Europeans and Their Languages (PDF) (Report). Eurobarometer Special Surveys. Retrieved 12 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (27 March 2015).  Fasold, Ralph W.; Connor-Linton, Jeffrey, eds. (2014). An Introduction to Language and Linguistics (Second ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-316-06185-5.  Fischer, Olga; van der Wurff, Wim (2006). "Chapter 3: Syntax". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 109–198. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Giegerich, Heinz J. (1992). English Phonology: An Introduction. Cambridge Textbooks in Linguistics. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-33603-1.  Gneuss, Helmut (2013). "Chapter 2: The Old English Language". In Godden, Malcolm; Lapidge, Michael. The Cambridge companion to Old English literature (Second ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 19–49. ISBN 978-0-521-15402-4.  Görlach, Manfred (1991). Introduction to Early Modern English. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-32529-3.  Gordin, Michael D. (4 February 2015). "Absolute English". Aeon. Retrieved 16 February 2015.  Gordon, Elizabeth; Campbell, Lyle; Hay, Jennifer; Maclagan, Margaret; Sudbury, Angela; Trudgill, Peter (2004). New Zealand English: its origins and evolution. Studies in English Language. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-10895-9.  Gottlieb, H. (2006). "Linguistic Influence". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 196–206. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04455-2. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Graddol, David (2006). English Next: Why global English may mean the end of 'English as a Foreign Language' (PDF). The British Council. Retrieved 7 February 2015. Lay summary – ELT Journal (7 February 2015).  Graddol, David (2010). English Next India: The future of English in India (PDF). The British Council. ISBN 978-0-86355-627-2. Retrieved 7 February 2015. Lay summary – ELT Journal (7 February 2015).  Graddol, David; Leith, Dick; Swann, Joan; Rhys, Martin; Gillen, Julia, eds. (2007). Changing English. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-37679-2. Retrieved 11 February 2015.  Green, Lisa J. (2002). African American English: a linguistic introduction. Cambridge University Press.  Greenbaum, S.; Nelson, G. (1 January 2002). An introduction to English grammar (Second ed.). Longman. ISBN 978-0-582-43741-8.  Halliday, M. A. K.; Hasan, Ruqaiya (1976). Cohesion in English. Pearson Education ltd.  Hancock, Ian F.; Angogo, Rachel (1982). "English in East Africa". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 415–438. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Harbert, Wayne (2007). The Germanic Languages. Cambridge Language Surveys. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511755071. ISBN 978-0-521-01511-0. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Lay summary – Language (journal of the Linguistic Society of America) (26 February 2015).  Hickey, R. (2007). Irish English: History and present-day forms. Cambridge University Press.  Hickey, R., ed. (2005). Legacies of colonial English: Studies in transported dialects. Cambridge University Press.  Hogg, Richard M. (1992). "Chapter 3: Phonology and Morphology". In Hogg, Richard M. The Cambridge History of the English Language. 1: The Beginnings to 1066. Cambridge University Press. pp. 67–168. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521264747. ISBN 978-0-521-26474-7.  Hogg, Richard M. (2006). "Chapter7: English in Britain". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 360–61. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  "How English evolved into a global language". BBC. 20 December 2010. Retrieved 9 August 2015.  "How many words are there in the English language?". Oxford Dictionaries Online. Oxford University Press. 2015. Retrieved 2 April 2015. How many words are there in the English language? There is no single sensible answer to this question. It's impossible to count the number of words in a language, because it's so hard to decide what actually counts as a word.  Huddleston, Rodney; Pullum, Geoffrey K. (15 April 2002). The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-43146-0. Retrieved 10 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (10 February 2015).  Hughes, Arthur; Trudgill, Peter (1996). English Accents and Dialects (3rd ed.). Arnold Publishers.  International Civil Aviation Organization (2011). "Personnel Licensing FAQ". International Civil Aviation Organization – Air Navigation Bureau. In which languages does a licence holder need to demonstrate proficiency?. Retrieved 16 December 2014. Controllers working on stations serving designated airports and routes used by international air services shall demonstrate language proficiency in English as well as in any other language(s) used by the station on the ground.  International Maritime Organization (2011). "IMO Standard Marine Communication Phrases". Retrieved 16 December 2014.  International Phonetic Association (1999). Handbook of the International Phonetic Association: A guide to the use of the International Phonetic Alphabet. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-65236-7.  Jambor, Paul Z. (December 2007). "English Language Imperialism: Points of View". Journal of English as an International Language. 2: 103–123.  Jespersen, Otto (2007) [1924]. "Case: The number of English cases". The Philosophy of Grammar. Routledge.  Kachru, B. (2006). "English: World Englishes". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 195–202. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00645-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Kastovsky, Dieter (2006). "Chapter 4: Vocabulary". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 199–270. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  König, Ekkehard; van der Auwera, Johan, eds. (1994). The Germanic Languages. Routledge Language Family Descriptions. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-28079-2. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Lay summary (26 February 2015).  The survey of the Germanic branch languages includes chapters by Winfred P. Lehmann, Ans van Kemenade, John Ole Askedal, Erik Andersson, Neil Jacobs, Silke Van Ness, and Suzanne Romaine. König, Ekkehard (1994). "17. English". In König, Ekkehard; van der Auwera, Johan. The Germanic Languages. Routledge Language Family Descriptions. Routledge. pp. 532–562. ISBN 978-0-415-28079-2. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Lay summary (26 February 2015).  Labov, W. (1972). "13. The Social Stratification of (R) in New York City Department Stores". Sociolinguistic patterns. University of Pennsylvania Press.  Labov, W. (2012). "1. About Language and Language Change". Dialect Diversity in America: The Politics of Language Change. University of Virginia Press.  Labov, William; Ash, Sharon; Boberg, Charles (2006). The Atlas of North American English. Berlin: de Gruyter. ISBN 3-11-016746-8. Retrieved 2 April 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Lanham, L. W. (1982). "English in South Africa". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 324–352. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Lass, Roger (1992). "2. Phonology and Morphology". In Blake, Norman. Cambridge History of the English Language. II: 1066–1476. Cambridge University Press. pp. 103–123.  Lass, Roger (2000). "Chapter 3: Phonology and Morphology". In Lass, Roger. The Cambridge History of the English Language, Volume III: 1476–1776. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 56–186.  Lass, Roger (2002), "South African English", in Mesthrie, Rajend, Language in South Africa, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-79105-2  Lass, Roger (2006). "Chapter 2: Phonology and Morphology". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 46–47. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Lawler, J. (2006). "Punctuation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 290–291. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04573-9. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Lawton, David L. (1982). "English in the Caribbean". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 251–280. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Leech, G. N. (2006). A glossary of English grammar. Edinburgh University Press.  Leech, Geoffrey; Hundt, Marianne; Mair, Christian; Smith, Nicholas (22 October 2009). Change in contemporary English: a grammatical study (PDF). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86722-1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 22 September 2016. Lay summary (PDF) (29 March 2015).  Levine, L.; Crockett, H. J. (1966). "Speech Variation in a Piedmont Community: Postvocalic r*". Sociological Inquiry. 36 (2): 204–226. doi:10.1111/j.1475-682x.1966.tb00625.x.  Li, David C. S. (2003). "Between English and Esperanto: what does it take to be a world language?". International Journal of the Sociology of Language. 2003 (164): 33–63. doi:10.1515/ijsl.2003.055. ISSN 0165-2516. Retrieved 27 March 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Lim, L.; Ansaldo, U. (2006). "Singapore: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of Language & Linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 387–389. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01701-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Maclagan, Margaret (2010). "Chapter 8: The English(es) of New Zealand". In Kirkpatrick, Andy. The Routledge handbook of world Englishes. Routledge. pp. 151–164. ISBN 978-0-203-84932-3. Lay summary (29 March 2015).  MacMahon, M. K. (2006). "16. English Phonetics". In Bas Aarts; April McMahon. The Handbook of English Linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 359–382.  "Macquarie Dictionary". Australia's National Dictionary & Thesaurus Online | Macquarie Dictionary. Macmillan Publishers Group Australia. 2015. Retrieved 15 February 2015. (registration required (help)).  Mair, C.; Leech, G. (2006). "14 Current Changes in English Syntax". The handbook of English linguistics.  Mair, Christian (2006). Twentieth-century English: History, variation and standardization. Cambridge University Press.  Mazrui, Ali A.; Mazrui, Alamin (3 August 1998). The Power of Babel: Language and Governance in the African Experience. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-51429-1. Retrieved 15 February 2015. Lay summary (15 February 2015).  McArthur, Tom, ed. (1992). The Oxford Companion to the English Language. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-214183-5. Lay summary (15 February 2015).  McCrum, Robert; MacNeil, Robert; Cran, William (2003). The Story of English (Third Revised ed.). London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-200231-5.  McGuinness, Diane (1997). Why Our Children Can't Read, and what We Can Do about it: A Scientific Revolution in Reading. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-83161-9. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Lay summary (3 April 2015).  Meierkord, C. (2006). "Lingua Francas as Second Languages". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 163–171. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00641-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) "English". Merriam-webster.com. 26 February 2015. Retrieved 26 February 2015.  Mesthrie, Rajend (2010). "New Englishes and the native speaker debate". Language Sciences. 32: 594–601. doi:10.1016/j.langsci.2010.08.002. ISSN 0388-0001. Retrieved 17 February 2015.  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Miller, Jim (2002). An Introduction to English Syntax. Edinburgh University Press.  Montgomery, M. (1993). "The Southern Accent—Alive and Well". Southern Cultures. 1 (1): 47–64.  Mountford, J. (2006). "English Spelling: Rationale". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 156–159. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05018-5. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Mufwene, S. S. (2006). "Language Spread". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 613–616. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01291-8. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Nation, I. S. P. (15 March 2001). Learning Vocabulary in Another Language. Cambridge University Press. p. 477. ISBN 0-521-80498-1. Retrieved 4 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (4 February 2015).  National Records of Scotland (26 September 2013). "Census 2011: Release 2A". Scotland's Census 2011. Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Neijt, A. (2006). "Spelling Reform". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 68–71. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04574-0. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Nevalainen, Terttu; Tieken-Boon van Ostade, Ingrid (2006). "Chapter 5: Standardization". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency (11 December 2012). "Census 2011: Key Statistics for Northern Ireland December 2012" (PDF). Statistics Bulletin. Table KS207NI: Main Language. Retrieved 16 December 2014.  Northrup, David (20 March 2013). How English Became the Global Language. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-137-30306-6. Retrieved 25 March 2015. Lay summary (25 March 2015).  O'Dwyer, Bernard (2006). Modern English Structures, second edition: Form, Function, and Position. Broadview Press.  Office for National Statistics (4 March 2013). "Language in England and Wales, 2011". 2011 Census Analysis. Retrieved 16 December 2014.  "Oxford Learner's Dictionaries". Oxford. Retrieved 25 February 2015.  Patrick, P. L. (2006a). "Jamaica: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 88–90. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01760-0. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Patrick, P. L. (2006b). "English, African-American Vernacular". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 159–163. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05092-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Payne, John; Huddleston, Rodney (2002). "5. Nouns and noun phrases". In Huddleston, R.; Pullum, G. K. The Cambridge Grammar of English. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 323–522.  Phillipson, Robert (28 April 2004). English-Only Europe?: Challenging Language Policy. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-44349-9. Retrieved 15 February 2015.  Richter, Ingo (1 January 2012). "Introduction". In Richter, Dagmar; Richter, Ingo; Toivanen, Reeta; et al. Language Rights Revisited: The challenge of global migration and communication. BWV Verlag. ISBN 978-3-8305-2809-8. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  Roach, Peter (1991). English Phonetics and Phonology (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.  Roach, Peter (2009). English Phonetics and Phonology (4th ed.). Cambridge.  Robinson, Orrin (1992). Old English and Its Closest Relatives: A Survey of the Earliest Germanic Languages. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-2221-6. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Romaine, Suzanne (1982). "English in Scotland". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 56–83. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Romaine, Suzanne (1999). "Chapter 1: Introduction". In Romaine, Suzanne. Cambridge History of the English Language. IV: 1776–1997. Cambridge University Press. pp. 1–56. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521264778.002. ISBN 978-0-521-26477-8.  Romaine, S. (2006). "Language Policy in Multilingual Educational Contexts". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 584–596. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00646-5. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) "The Routes of English". 1 August 2015.  Rowicka, G. J. (2006). "Canada: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 194–195. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01848-4. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Rubino, C. (2006). "Philippines: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 323–326. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01736-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Ryan, Camille (August 2013). "Language Use in the United States: 2011" (PDF). American Community Survey Reports. p. 1. Retrieved 16 December 2014.  Sailaja, Pingali (2009). Indian English. Dialects of English. Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 978-0-7486-2595-6. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Schiffrin, Deborah (1988). Discourse Markers. Studies in Interactional Sociolinguistics. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-35718-0. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Schneider, Edgar (2007). Postcolonial English: Varieties Around the World. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-53901-2. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Schönweitz, Thomas (2001). "Gender and Postvocalic /r/ in the American South: A Detailed Socioregional Analysis". American Speech. 76 (3): 259–285. doi:10.1215/00031283-76-3-259.  Shaywitz, Sally E. (2003). Overcoming Dyslexia: A New and Complete Science-based Program for Reading Problems at Any Level. A.A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-375-40012-4. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Lay summary (3 April 2015).  Sheidlower, Jesse (10 April 2006). "How many words are there in English?". Retrieved 2 April 2015. The problem with trying to number the words in any language is that it's very hard to agree on the basics. For example, what is a word?  Smith, Jeremy J. (2 April 2009). Old English: a linguistic introduction. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86677-4.  Statistics Canada (22 August 2014). "Population by mother tongue and age groups (total), 2011 counts, for Canada, provinces and territories". Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Statistics New Zealand (April 2014). "2013 QuickStats About Culture and Identity" (PDF). p. 23. Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Lehohla, Pali, ed. (2012). "Population by first language spoken and province" (PDF). Census 2011: Census in Brief (PDF). Pretoria: Statistics South Africa. p. 23. ISBN 978-0-621-41388-5. Report No. 03?01?41. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 November 2015.  Svartvik, Jan; Leech, Geoffrey (12 December 2006). English – One Tongue, Many Voices. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-4039-1830-7. Retrieved 5 March 2015. Lay summary (16 March 2015).  Swan, M. (2006). "English in the Present Day (Since ca. 1900)". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 149–156. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05058-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Sweet, Henry (2014) [1892]. A New English Grammar. Cambridge University Press.  Thomas, Erik R. (2008). "Rural Southern white accents". In Edgar W. Schneider. Varieties of English. 2: The Americas and the Caribbean. de Gruyter. pp. 87–114. Retrieved 2 April 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Thomason, Sarah G.; Kaufman, Terrence (1988). Language Contact, Creolization and Genetic Linguistics. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-91279-3.  Todd, Loreto (1982). "The English language in West Africa". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 281–305. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Toon, Thomas E. (1982). "Variation in Contemporary American English". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 210–250. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Toon, Thomas E. (1992). "Old English Dialects". In Hogg, Richard M. The Cambridge History of the English Language. 1: The Beginnings to 1066. Cambridge University Press. pp. 409–451. ISBN 978-0-521-26474-7.  Trask, Larry; Trask, Robert Lawrence (January 2010). Why Do Languages Change?. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83802-3. Retrieved 5 March 2015.  Trudgill, Peter (2000). The Dialects of England (2nd ed.). Oxford: Blackwell. ISBN 978-0-631-21815-9. Lay summary (27 March 2015).  Trudgill, P. (2006). "Accent". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. p. 14. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01506-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Trudgill, Peter; Hannah, Jean (2002). International English: A Guide to the Varieties of Standard English (4th ed.). London: Hodder Education. ISBN 0-340-80834-9.  Trudgill, Peter; Hannah, Jean (1 January 2008). International English: A Guide to the Varieties of Standard English (5th ed.). London: Arnold. ISBN 978-0-340-97161-1. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 26 March 2015. Lay summary (26 March 2015).  United Nations (2008). "Everything You Always Wanted to Know About the United Nations" (PDF). Retrieved 4 April 2015. The working languages at the UN Secretariat are English and French.  Wardhaugh, Ronald (2010). An Introduction to Sociolinguistics. Blackwell textbooks in Linguistics; 4 (Sixth ed.). Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4051-8668-1.  Watts, Richard J. (3 March 2011). Language Myths and the History of English. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195327601.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-532760-1. Retrieved 10 March 2015. Lay summary (10 March 2015).  Wells, J.C. (1982). Accents of English, I, II, III. Cambridge University Press.  Wojcik, R. H. (2006). "Controlled Languages". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 139–142. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05081-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Wolfram, W. (2006). "Variation and Language: Overview". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of Language & Linguistics. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 333–341. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04256-5. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) External links Find more aboutEnglish languageat Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Textbooks from Wikibooks Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Accents of English from Around the World (University of Edinburgh) Sound files comparing how 110 words are pronounced in 50 English accents from around the world Articles related to the English language Linguistics v t e Description of the English language Grammar Phonology Stress and reduced vowels Orthography Alphabet Braille Dialects Language history Phonological history v t e History of English Proto-Indo-European Proto-Germanic Proto-West-Germanic Anglo-Frisian languages Old English Anglo-Norman language Middle English Early Modern English Modern English Phonological history General Old English Vowels Great Vowel Shift low unrounded vowels low back vowels high back vowels high front vowels diphthongs changes before historic /l/ changes before historic /r/ trisyllabic laxing Northern Cities Vowel Shift Consonants rhoticity flapping t-glottalization l-vocalization consonant clusters h-dropping wh th th-fronting ð (eth) þ (thorn) th-stopping v t e Dialects and accents of Modern English by continent Europe United Kingdom England   Varieties by common name Barrovian Black Country Brummie Bristolian Cheshire Cockney "Mockney" Cornish Cumbrian East Anglian East Midlands Essex Estuary Geordie Kentish Lancastrian Mackem Mancunian Multicultural London Norfolk Northern Pitmatic Potteries Received Pronunciation Scouse Southern Suffolk Sussex West Country "Mummerset" West Midlands Yorkshire   Varieties by geographic location East of England Essex Norfolk Suffolk East Midlands North Cheshire Cumbria [Barrow] Lancashire Manchester Merseyside Sunderland Tyneside Yorkshire South Kent Thames Estuary; London [Multicultural London] Sussex West Country Bristol Cornwall Dorset West Midlands Black Country Birmingham Stoke-on-Trent Northern Ireland Mid Ulster Ulster Scots Scotland Glasgow Highlands Lowlands Wales Cardiff Gower Ireland Dublin D4 South-West Cork Supraregional Ulster Channel Islands Alderney Guernsey Jersey Elsewhere Gibraltar Isle of Man Malta North and South America United States   Varieties by common name African American Appalachian Boston Cajun California Chicago; Detroit; Great Lakes Chicano Mid-Atlantic Philadelphia; South Jersey Baltimorese General American High Tider Maine Miami Midland Midwestern New England New Mexican New York Northeast Pennsylvania Old Southern Ozark Pacific Northwest Pennsylvania Dutch Pittsburghese Rhode Island Southern Texan Upper Midwestern Western Vermont Yat Yeshivish Yooper   Varieties by geographic location Delaware Valley; Mid-Atlantic Pennsylvania Dutch Philadelphia; South Jersey Baltimore Midland Midwest Great Lakes; Inland North Upper Midwest Upper Peninsula of Michigan New England Boston Maine Rhode Island Vermont New York City; North Jersey New York Latino North Northeast Pennsylvania South Acadiana Appalachia Chesapeake; Pamlico Miami New Orleans Ozarks Texas West California New Mexico Pacific Northwest Western Pennsylvania Canada Aboriginal Atlantic Cape Breton Newfoundland Lunenburg Standard Ottawa Valley Pacific Northwest Quebec Caribbean Bahamas Barbados Dominican Republic Jamaica Puerto Rico Trinidad Elsewhere Bermuda Falkland Islands Guyana Oceania Australia Aboriginal Broad; Strine General South Australian Torres Strait West Australian Elsewhere Fiji New Zealand Palau Solomon Islands Other continents Africa Cameroon Ghana Kenya Liberia Malawi Namibia Nigeria Sierra Leone South Africa Afrikaans Black Cape Flats Indian White Uganda Asia Bangladesh Brunei Burma or Myanmar Hong Kong India Malaysia Nepal Pakistan Philippines Singapore Sri Lanka v t e Modern Germanic languages and dialects North Germanic West Scandinavian Bergensk Elfdalian Faroese Gøtudanskt Icelandic Jamtlandic Norwegian Bokmål Nynorsk Sognamål Trøndersk Valdris Vestlandsk Vikværsk East Scandinavian Bornholmsk Dalecarlian Danish Insular Danish Jutlandic South Perkerdansk Gutnish Kalix Kebabnorsk Kiruna Luleå Norrland Småländska South Swedish Scanian Stockholm Rinkeby Uppländska Västgötska Westrobothnian Swedish Åland Estonia Finland Ostrobothnia West Germanic Anglo- Frisian English English dialects North Frisian Saterland Frisian Scots West Frisian Low Franconian Dutch Hollandic West Flemish Zeelandic East Flemish Brabantian Limburgish Meuse-Rhenish Afrikaans Low German/ Low Saxon Dutch Low Saxon Northern Low Saxon Westphalian Eastphalian Mecklenburgisch-Vorpommersch Brandenburgisch East Pomeranian Central Pomeranian Low Prussian High German Standard German German Swiss Austrian Central German Ripuarian Moselle Franconian Luxembourgish Lorraine Franconian Rhine Franconian Hessian Thuringian Upper Saxon High Prussian Lausitzisch-neumärkisch Silesian Upper German East Franconian South Franconian Northern Bavarian Central Bavarian Southern Bavarian Swabian Low Alemannic Central Alemannic High Alemannic Highest Alemannic Swiss German Yiddish v t e Dictionaries of English Old and Middle English An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary Dictionary of Old English Middle English Dictionary Historic Catholicon Anglicum (1483) The English Schoole-Master (1596) The New World of English Words (1658) A New English Dictionary (1702) An Universal Etymological English Dictionary (1721) A Dictionary of the English Language (1755) Webster's Dictionary (1828) Worcester's Dictionary Richardson's New Dictionary Imperial Dictionary (1847–50) Century Dictionary (1889–91) American English American Heritage Dictionary of American English Dictionary of American Regional English Encarta New Oxford American Oxford American Random House Webster's Webster's New World Webster's Third New International Dictionary World Book Dictionary British English Chambers Collins Oxford English Concise Oxford English Compact Oxford English Shorter Oxford English Historical Thesaurus Oxford Dictionary of English Penguin Canadian English Canadian Oxford Dictionary of Canadianisms Gage Canadian (Full list) Australian English Australian National Australian Oxford Macquarie Online Wiktionary Collaborative International Dictionary of English OmegaWiki Urban Dictionary Wordnik Learners / ESL Cambridge Advanced Learner's Collins COBUILD Advanced Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners Merriam-Webster's Advanced Learner's Oxford Advanced Learner's Geopolitical use v t e English-speaking world Click on a coloured area to see an article about English in that country or region Further links Articles English-speaking world History of the English language British Empire English in the Commonwealth of Nations Lists List of countries by English-speaking population List of countries where English is an official language   Countries and territories where English is the national language or the native language of the majority Africa Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Americas Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda The Bahamas Barbados Belize Bermuda British Virgin Islands Canada Cayman Islands Dominica Falkland Islands Grenada Guyana Jamaica Montserrat Saba Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Trinidad and Tobago Turks and Caicos Islands United States United States Virgin Islands Europe Guernsey Ireland Isle of Man Jersey United Kingdom Oceania Australia New Zealand Norfolk Island Pitcairn Islands   Countries and territories where English is an official language, but not the majority first language Africa Botswana Cameroon The Gambia Ghana Kenya Lesotho Liberia Malawi Mauritius Namibia Nigeria Rwanda Sierra Leone Somaliland South Africa South Sudan Sudan Swaziland Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Americas Puerto Rico Asia Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Special Administrative Region India Pakistan Philippines Singapore Europe Gibraltar Malta Oceania American Samoa Cook Islands Fiji Guam Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru Niue Northern Mariana Islands Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tokelau Tuvalu Vanuatu Dependencies shown in italics. Authority control GND: 4014777-0 SUDOC: 027219232 NDL: 00561788 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=English_language&oldid=777197756" Categories: Analytic languages English language English languages Fusional languages Germanic languages Languages of American Samoa Languages of Antigua and Barbuda Languages of Australia Languages of Belize Languages of Bermuda Languages of Botswana Languages of Cameroon Languages of Canada Languages of Fiji Languages of Ghana Languages of Grenada Languages of Guam Languages of Guyana Languages of Hong Kong Languages of India Languages of Ireland Languages of Jamaica Languages of Kenya Languages of Kiribati Languages of Lesotho Languages of Liberia Languages of Malawi Languages of Malaysia Languages of Malta Languages of Mauritius Languages of Namibia Languages of Nauru Languages of New Zealand Languages of Nigeria Languages of Niue Languages of Pakistan Languages of Palau Languages of Papua New Guinea Languages of Rwanda Languages of Saint Kitts and Nevis Languages of Saint Lucia Languages of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Languages of Samoa Languages of Seychelles Languages of Sierra Leone Languages of Singapore Languages of South Africa Languages of South Sudan Languages of Sudan Languages of Swaziland Languages of the Bahamas Languages of the British Virgin Islands Languages of the Cayman Islands Languages of the Marshall Islands Languages of the Philippines Languages of the Pitcairn Islands Languages of the Solomon Islands Languages of the United Kingdom Languages of the United States Virgin Islands Languages of the United States Languages of Tokelau Languages of Trinidad and Tobago Languages of Uganda Languages of Vanuatu Languages of Zambia Languages of Zimbabwe Stress-timed languages Subject–verb–object languages Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Good articles Use dmy dates from February 2016 EngvarB from July 2014 Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code ISO language articles citing sources other than Ethnologue Articles including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Old English-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016 Articles with hAudio microformats Pages containing links to subscription-or-libraries content Pages containing links to subscription-only content Pages with login required references or sources Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiquote Languages Acèh ???????? ???????? Afrikaans Akan Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés ????? Armãneashti Arpetan ??????? Asturianu Avañe'? ???? Aymar aru Az?rbaycanca ?????? Bamanankan ????? Bahasa Banjar Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ??????? Bikol Central ????????? Boarisch ??????? Bosanski Brezhoneg ?????? Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski Eesti ???????? Emiliàn e rumagnòl ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara E?egbe ????? Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ?? ????? ??????? ?????? ?????? ?????? / Gõychi Konknni ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hawai?i ??????? ?????? Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue ??????/inuktitut ???? IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kalaallisut ????? Kapampangan ????????-??????? ??????? ????? / ????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Kinyarwanda Kiswahili ???? Kongo Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî ???????? ????? ???? Ladino ????? ????? ??? ???? ?????? Latga?u Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Ligure Limburgs Lingála La .lojban. Lumbaart Magyar ?????? ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ????????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-d??ng-ng?? Mirandés ??????? ?????? ?????????? N?huatl Dorerin Naoero Nederlands Nedersaksies N?hiyaw?win / ??????? ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norfuk / Pitkern Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? Pälzisch Pangasinan ?????? Papiamentu ???? Patois ????? ???? ????????? Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Q?r?mtatarca Reo tahiti Ripoarisch Român? Rumantsch Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sámegiella Gagana Samoa ????????? Sängö Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sesotho Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana Shqip Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? SiSwati Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????????? / ?????????? ?l?nski Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Sranantongo ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Taqbaylit Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ?????? ??? ?????? ??? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe Twi ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? ???? ???????? / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Võro Walon ?? West-Vlams Winaray Wolof ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zazaki Zeêuws Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 25 April 2017, at 19:48. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Arts |||Portal:Arts From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Shortcuts: P:A P:ARTS Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Sociology portals: Arts · Anthropology · Community · Culture · Economics · Education · Geography · Gender studies · Globalization · History · Human rights · Internet · Law · Philosophy · Social movements · Social sciences · Social welfare and social work · Society edit   The Arts Portal Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts The arts is a vast subdivision of culture, composed of many creative endeavors and disciplines. It is a broader term than "art", which, as a description of a field, usually means only the visual arts. The arts encompass the visual arts, the literary arts and the performing arts – music, theatre, dance and film, among others. This list is by no means comprehensive, but only meant to introduce the concept of the arts. For all intents and purposes, the history of the arts begins with the history of art. The arts might have origins in early human evolutionary prehistory. Ancient Greek art saw the veneration of the animal form and the development of equivalent skills to show musculature, poise, beauty and anatomically correct proportions. Ancient Roman art depicted gods as idealized humans, shown with characteristic distinguishing features (e.g. Jupiter's thunderbolt). In Byzantine and Gothic art of the Middle Ages, the dominance of the church insisted on the expression of biblical and not material truths. Eastern art has generally worked in a style akin to Western medieval art, namely a concentration on surface patterning and local colour (meaning the plain colour of an object, such as basic red for a red robe, rather than the modulations of that colour brought about by light, shade and reflection). A characteristic of this style is that the local colour is often defined by an outline (a contemporary equivalent is the cartoon). This is evident in, for example, the art of India, Tibet and Japan. Religious Islamic art forbids iconography, and expresses religious ideas through geometry instead. The physical and rational certainties depicted by the 19th-century Enlightenment were shattered not only by new discoveries of relativity by Einstein and of unseen psychology by Freud, but also by unprecedented technological development. Paradoxically the expressions of new technologies were greatly influenced by the ancient tribal arts of Africa and Oceania, through the works of Paul Gauguin and the Post-Impressionists, Pablo Picasso and the Cubists, as well as the Futurists and others. More about The arts... View new selections below (purge) edit   Featured article Louis Lambert is a French novel by Honoré de Balzac (1799–1850), included in the Études philosophiques section of his novel sequence La Comédie humaine. Set mostly in a school at Vendôme, it examines the life and theories of a boy genius fascinated by the Swedish philosopher Emanuel Swedenborg (1688–1772). Balzac wrote Louis Lambert during the summer of 1832 while he was staying with friends at the Château de Saché. The novel contains a minimal plot, focusing mostly on the metaphysical ideas of its boy-genius protagonist and his only friend (eventually revealed to be Balzac himself). Although it is not a significant example of the realist style for which Balzac became famous, the novel provides insight into the author's own childhood. Specific details and events from the author's life – including punishment from teachers and social ostracism – suggest a fictionalized autobiography. Critics panned the novel, but Balzac believed that it provided an important look at philosophy, especially metaphysics. As he developed the scheme for La Comédie humaine, he placed Louis Lambert in the Études philosophiques section, and later returned to the same themes in his novel Séraphîta, about an androgynous angelic creature. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured picture Credit: Muhammad Mahdi Karim The glass house at Lal Bagh, a botanical garden in Bangalore, India. The garden was commissioned by the ruler of Mysore, Hyder Ali in 1760, and completed during the reign of his son Tipu Sultan. The glass house was modeled on London's Crystal Palace and constructed at the end of the 19th century. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Did you know... ... that The Fairman Rogers Four-in-Hand (pictured) was the first painting to demonstrate, based on systematic photographic analysis, how horses move? ... that Cheyenne artist Bently Spang satirized anthropologists' depictions of Native Americans as a "lost culture" with a museum exhibit showcasing ordinary objects? ... that Bagyi Aung Soe, now recognized as one of Burma's most important modern artists, lived in poverty and was considered by some to be mad? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   In this month 9 April 2000 – Jackie Evancho is born. At the age of 10, she becomes the youngest singer in history with a platinum album, O Holy Night. 10 April 1900 – Scottish soprano Mary Garden makes her professional debut singing the title role in Gustave Charpentier's Louise at the Opéra-Comique in Paris 11 April 1869 – Norwegian sculptor Gustav Vigeland, designer of the Nobel Peace Prize medal, is born near Halse og Harkmark 12 April 1937 – Abdülhak Hâmid Tarhan, an early 20th-century Turkish playwright and poet who was one of the leading lights of the Turkish Romantic period dies in Istanbul 23 April 1616 – William Shakespeare (pictured), often considered the greatest English playwright, dies in Stratford-upon-Avon at the age of 52 29 April 1968 – Hair, which defined the genre of the "rock musical", has its Broadway premiere at the Biltmore Theatre More anniversaries... edit   News April 5: Wikinews visits set of indie film 'Dead on Set' April 3: Pop-artist James Rosenquist dies aged 83 March 27: Fans unite at Toronto Comicon, meet Degrassi stars March 1: Politically concerned movie Zootopia wins Academy Award for Best Animated Feature Film February 15: Adele and David Bowie each win five Grammys Arts on Wikinews edit   Featured biography André Kertész (1894–1985) was a Hungarian-born photographer distinguished by his photographic composition and by his early efforts in developing the photo essay. In the early years of his lengthy career, his then-unorthodox camera angles, and his unwillingness to compromise his personal photographic style, prevented his work from gaining wider recognition. Even towards the end of his life, Kertész did not feel he had gained worldwide recognition. The first photographer to have an exposition devoted to his work, he is recognized as one of the seminal figures of photojournalism, if not photography as a whole. Dedicated by his family to work as a stock broker, Kertész was an autodidact and his early work was mostly published in magazines. The imminent threat of WWII pushed him to immigrate to the United States, where he had a more difficult life and needed to rebuild his reputation through commissioned work. He would take offense with several editors that he felt did not recognize his work. In the 1940s and '50s he stopped working for magazines and began to achieve greater international success. Despite the numerous awards he collected over the years, he still felt unrecognized, a sentiment which did not change even at the time of his death. His career is generally divided into four periods – the Hungarian period, the French period, the American period and, towards the end of his life, the International period. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured audio 1788 – Auld Lang Syne Frank C. Stanley's 1910 performance of Robert Burns' Auld Lang Syne. Contains the first and last verse. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories ? Arts ? Arts portal ? Arts by culture ? Arts by place ? Arts-related lists ? Aesthetics ? Arts genres by country or nationality ? Arts awards ? Censorship in the arts ? Crafts ? Creative works ? Arts districts ? Arts events ? Literature ? Arts occupations ? Arts organizations ? Arts portals ? Performing arts ? Religion and the arts ? Arts venues ? Visual arts ? Women and the arts ? Works about the arts ? Wikipedia books on arts ? Art stubs edit   WikiProjects Parent project Arts Descendant projects Aesthetics Architecture Books Novels Collections care Dance Films Horror Literature Magic Music Albums Classical music Composers Guitar Musicians Music Venues Opera Gilbert and Sullivan Richard Wagner Poetry Television Theatre Elizabethan theatre Musical theatre Visual arts Animation Anime and manga Contemporary art Comics Graffiti Graphic design Fashion Photography Public art What are WikiProjects? edit   Selected quote “ It [the movie art form] combines so many other art forms, as do theater and opera, but the essence of cinema is editing. It's the combination of what can be extraordinary images, images of people during emotional moments, or just images in a general sense, but put together in a kind of alchemy. A number of images put together a certain way become something quite above and beyond what any of them are individually. ” — Francis Ford Coppola ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Related portals Architecture Culture Dance Film Literature Music Philosophy Poetry Television Theatre Video games Visual arts Writing edit   Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Requests articles (arts and entertainment) Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Arts Expand: check Art stubs to expand Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Arts topics, requested pictures edit   Associated Wikimedia Arts on Wikibooks  Arts on Wikimedia Commons Arts on Wikinews  Arts on Wikiquote  Arts on Wikisource  Arts on Wikiversity  Arts on Wiktionary  Manuals and books Images and media News Quotations Texts Learning resources Definitions What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Arts&oldid=649230671" Categories: Arts portal Arts Visual arts Performing arts Arts portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Català ?eština Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español ????? Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kapampangan ??????? Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Malagasy ?????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? Nederlands ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ???? ????? ?????? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? ????? ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Svenska Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ?????? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? West-Vlams ?? Xitsonga ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 28 February 2015, at 14:19. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography |||Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology edit   The Biography Portal Cultural icon A biography is a detailed description or account of someone's life. More than a list of basic facts (education, work, relationships, and death), a biography also portrays a subject's experience of these events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of his or her life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of a subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Biographical works in diverse media—from literature to film—form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and, at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is about a life of a subject, written by that subject or sometimes with a collaborator. More about biographies… View new selections below (purge) edit   Featured biography Ahmose I (sometimes written Amosis I and meaning The Moon is Born) was a pharaoh of ancient Egypt and the founder of the Eighteenth dynasty. He was a member of the Theban royal house, the son of pharaoh Tao II Seqenenre and brother of the last pharaoh of the Seventeenth dynasty, King Kamose. Sometime during the reign of his father or grandfather, Thebes rebelled against the Hyksos, the rulers of Lower Egypt. When he was seven his father was killed, and when he was about ten his brother died of unknown causes, after reigning only three years. Ahmose I assumed the throne after the death of his brother, and upon coronation became known as Neb-Pehty-Re (The Lord of Strength is Re). During his reign he completed the conquest and expulsion of the Hyksos from the delta region, restored Theban rule over the whole of Egypt and successfully reasserted Egyptian power in its formerly subject territories of Nubia and Canaan. He then reorganized the administration of the country, reopened quarries, mines and trade routes and began massive construction projects of a type that had not been undertaken since the time of the Middle Kingdom. This building program culminated in the construction of the last pyramid built by native Egyptian rulers. Ahmose's reign laid the foundations for the New Kingdom, under which Egyptian power reached its peak. His reign is usually dated to about 1550–1525 BC. (Read more...) Archive – More "Featured biographies"... edit   Selected portrait Credit: Bain News Service, restored by jjron Lillian Diana Gish (October 14, 1893 – February 27, 1993) was an American stage, screen, and television actress, director and writer whose film acting career spanned 75 years, from 1912 to 1987. She was a prominent film star of the 1910s and 1920s, particularly associated with the films of director D. W. Griffith, including her leading role in Griffith's seminal Birth of a Nation. More selected pictures... Read more... edit   Things you can do Write an article Expand an article about: a person an actor an animator an artist a businessperson a diplomat an educator an engineer a jurist a military person a musician a politician a scientist a sportsperson a writer a photographer Improve an article by: adding references Review an article John Gilchrist (linguist) • Thomas Brattle • Answer requests for comments Assess an article Assessment requests Unassessed articles edit   Categories Biography • People By association • By behavior • By ethnicity • By gender • By language • By nationality By occupation: Academics • Scientists Actors • Artists • Choreographers • Comedians • Dancers • Directors • Musicians • Photographers • Playwrights • Writers Astronauts • Aviators • Explorers • Mountain climbers Businesspeople • Computer designers • Innovators Heads of state • Humanitarians • Journalists • Lawyers • Politicians • Warriors Sportspeople • Association football players • Baseball players • Basketball players • Olympians By place • By political orientation • By religion By status: Award winners • Billionaires • Celebrities By time • Lists of people ? Biography (genre) ? Biography awards ? Biographers ? Family history ? Biography journals ? Biographical museums ? Oral history ? Person databases ? The Biography Channel shows ? Biographical works edit   On this day – April 26 Births 121 - Marcus Aurelius, Roman Emperor (d. 180) 1711 - David Hume, Scottish philosopher and historian (d. 1776) (pictured) 1785 - John James Audubon, French-American naturalist and illustrator (d. 1851) 1917 - I.M. Pei, Chinese-born architect 1933 - Carol Burnett, American comedian Deaths 1865 - John Wilkes Booth, American actor and assassin (shot) (b. 1838) 1970 - Gypsy Rose Lee, American actress (b. 1911) 1989 - Lucille Ball, American actress and comedian (b. 1911) More of today's anniversaries... edit   Did you know ... that Madmen in the Yard, a drawing by the Croatian painter Ignjat Job (pictured), was influenced by his two-year stay in a mental hospital? ... that USMC Lieutenant General Henry Louis Larsen was Governor of American Samoa and Governor of Guam after his father-in-law and brother-in-law were each Governor of Colorado? ... that detailed drawings by French explorer Louis Delaporte guided the reconstruction of Pha That Luang, a major Buddhist temple in Laos? ... that although Norma Lyon studied animal science at Iowa State University, she ended up sculpting butter at state fairs? ... that Tom Paton, a member of the Montreal hockey club, was the first goaltender to win the Stanley Cup in 1893? ... that after the Ottoman general Turahano?lu Ömer Bey wiped out one of Dracula's armies in 1462, he deposited 2,000 severed heads at the feet of Sultan Mehmed II? ... that the hasty marriage of Thomas Thynne of Longleat may have helped to inspire Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet? Read more... edit   Quote of the week "There is no Death! What seems so is transition; This life of mortal breath Is but a suburb of the life elysian, Whose portal we call Death." — Henry Wadsworth Longfellow In Resignation, 1849 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit   WikiProjects List of WikiProjects and work groups that involve biography articles: Arts and entertainment Actors and Filmmakers Composers Canadian Dictionary of Biography Initiative Living persons Philosophers Saints Romance authors Military Peers and Baronets Politics and government U.S. Members of Congress U.S. presidents Royalty and nobility Science and academia Aerospace Sports and games Baseball players List of all WikiProjects See also: Biographies of living persons • Manual of Style (biographies) edit   Related portals Anthropology Community Criminal justice Culture Death Gangs Human rights LGBT Mind and brain Music Philosophy Religion Sexuality Social and political philosophy Thinking edit   Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Wikispecies  Species Wikipedia's Portals All Portals Overview Glossaries Indices Lists Outlines Categories Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Featured portals About portals Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=771163531" Categories: Depreciated Portal:Biography pages Biography portal Biography portals Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ?????? ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 19 March 2017, at 22:49. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Geography |||Portal:Geography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Sociology portals: Arts · Anthropology · Community · Culture · Economics · Education · Geography · Gender studies · Globalization · History · Human rights · Internet · Law · Philosophy · Social movements · Social sciences · Social welfare and social work · Society Places near you edit   The Geography Portal Transportation geography Geography is the science that studies the lands, the features, the inhabitants, and the phenomena of the Earth. A literal translation would be "to describe or write about the Earth". The first person to use the word "geography" was Eratosthenes (276–194 BC). Four historical traditions in geographical research are the spatial analysis of the natural and the human phenomena (geography as the study of distribution), the area studies (places and regions), the study of the human-land relationship, and research in the Earth sciences. Modern geography is an all-encompassing discipline that foremost seeks to understand the Earth and all of its human and natural complexities—not merely where objects are, but how they have changed and come to be. Geography has been called "the world discipline" and "the bridge between the human and the physical science". Geography is divided into two main branches: human geography and physical geography. More about geography… View new selections below (purge) edit   Featured article Karnataka is a state in South West India. It was created on 1 November 1956 with the passage of the States Reorganisation Act, and this day is annually celebrated as Karnataka Rajyotsava (Formation Day). Originally known as the State of Mysore, it was renamed Karnataka in 1973. It is the land of the Kannadiga, Tuluva, Konkani, and Kodava peoples. With over 61 million inhabitants as of 2011, Karnataka is the ninth largest state by population in India. Kannada is the most widely spoken and official language of the state. The two main river systems of the state are Krishna and its tributaries (Bhima, Ghataprabha, Vedavati, Malaprabha, and Tungabhadra) in the north, and the Cauvery and its tributaries (Hemavati, Shimsha, Arkavathi, Lakshmana Thirtha and Kabini) in the south. Both these rivers flow eastward and fall into the Bay of Bengal. With an antiquity that dates to the paleolithic, Karnataka has also been home to some of the most powerful empires of ancient and medieval India. The philosophers and musical bards patronised by these empires launched socio-religious and literary movements which have endured to the present day. Karnataka has contributed significantly to both the Carnatic and Hindustani forms of Indian classical music. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   In this month 7 April 1985 – Premiere of National Geographic Explorer on Nickelodeon 10 April 1982 – Arrival of Ranulph Fiennes and Charles R. Burton at North Pole 13 April 2005 – Launch of Genographic Project by National Geographic Society and IBM 27 April 1521 – Death of Ferdinand Magellan (pictured), Portuguese explorer who led part of the first expedition around the world More anniversaries... edit   Did you know... ...that the megalithic Niedertiefenbach tomb in Hesse (pictured), Germany has at least ten discernible layers of burials from the New Stone Age? ... that Broad Avenue in Memphis, Tennessee, went from vacant storefronts to a vibrant arts district in less than a decade? ... that forest degradation and illegal exports threaten the survival of the Rainforest Chameleon? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Things you can do Here are some tasks awaiting attention: Article requests?: See Requested articles/Social sciences/Geography, cities, regions and named places and Missing articles about Locations Assess?: Tag related article talk pages with {{WikiProject Geography}}. To help assess the quality and importance of geography articles, please see: Unassessed geography articles and Unknown-importance geography articles. Cleanup?: See Geography articles needing attention Geography Geographic information system Geography of China Geostatistics History of geography Holarctic Kriging Philosophy of geography Urbanism Valley Copyedit?: Geographical feature Glossary of geography terms List of world map changes Regions of North America (See Regions of Africa) Regions of Oceania Regions of South America Demographics of Asia (See Demographics of Africa) Demographics of Oceania Cycle of erosion Outer Continental Shelf Tied island Deletion sorting?: Listed at Geographic related deletion discussions Expand?: TOP PRIORITY: expand articles in Outline of geography and Outlines of regions (one for each country and region) - these are general reference companions to the main articles on each country. Are your favorite countries covered yet? The lists completed enough to be transferred to article space can be found at Portal:Contents/Geography and places. Index of geography articles (replace redirect with an article index, see Index of psychology articles as an example) List of geographers Visual geography Geographical coordinates?: See Articles missing geocoordinate data by country Infobox?: See Geography articles needing infoboxes Map?: See Wikipedia requested maps Notability?: See Geography articles with topics of unclear notability Photo?: See Wikipedia requested photographs of places Stubs?: See Geography stubs edit   Featured biography Mary Anning was a British fossil collector, dealer and palaeontologist who became known around the world for important finds she made in the Jurassic marine fossil beds at Lyme Regis where she lived. Her work contributed to fundamental changes in scientific thinking about prehistoric life and the history of the earth. Her discoveries included the first ichthyosaur skeleton to be correctly identified, found when she was just twelve years old; the first two plesiosaur skeletons ever found; the first pterosaur skeleton located outside Germany; and important fish fossils. Her observations were critical to the discovery that coprolites were fossilised faeces. Geologist Henry De la Beche's Duria Antiquior, the first widely circulated pictorial representation of a scene from prehistoric life derived from fossil reconstructions, was based largely on fossils Anning had found. Her gender and social class prevented her from fully participating in the scientific community of 19th-century Britain, prevented her from joining the Geological Society of London, and prevented her from getting full credit for her work during her lifetime. After her death her unusual life story attracted increasing interest. In 2010 the Royal Society included Anning in a list of the ten British women who have most influenced the history of science. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories ? Geography ? Geography by place ? Geography-related lists ? Geography awards and competitions ? Branches of geography ? Geographic classifications ? Geography conferences ? Geography education ? Environmental studies ? Exploration ? Geocodes ? Geographers ? Geographic data and information ? Geographical zones ? History of geography ? Land systems ? Landscape ? Lists of countries by geography ? Navigation ? Geography organizations ? Places ? Geographical regions ? Surveying ? Geographical technology ? Geography terminology ? Town squares ? Works about geography ? Geographic images ? Geography stubs edit   WikiProjects Parent project WikiProject Geography Descendant projects Caves Cities Countries Country subdivisions Demographics Deserts Former countries Geographical coordinates Glaciers Islands Lakes Maps Mountains Protected areas Rivers Subdivisions of former countries Tropical cyclones Urban studies and planning Volcanoes Waterfalls Related projects WikiProject Globalization What are WikiProjects? edit   Featured picture Credit: Ikiwaner Dead Acacia erioloba trees in Deadvlei, a white claypan inside Namib-Naukluft Park in the Namib Desert of Namibia. Deadvlei is surrounded by the highest sand dunes in the world, averaging 350 metres (1,150 ft) high. About 900 years ago, drought caused the dunes to block the Tsauchab river, which in turn killed the trees. However, because the desert is so dry, they do not decompose. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Selected quote “ Roll on, thou deep and dark blue Ocean—roll! / Ten thousand fleets sweep over thee in vain; / Man marks the earth with ruin—his control / Stops with the shore. ” — Lord Byron, Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, Canto IV (1818) ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Articles Antarctica Afro-Eurasia Americas Australia Africa Eurasia North America Oceania Europe Asia South America Supercontinents: Gondwana • Laurasia • Pangaea • Rodinia edit   Subportals Africa Antarctica Arctic Asia Caribbean Central America Europe European Union Islands Latin America Mediterranean Middle East North America Oceania Oceans South America edit   Related portals Atlas Atmosphere Atmospheric sciences Disasters Earth sciences Earthquakes Energy Environment Global warming Islands Mountains Physics Political science Science Seamounts Sociology Sustainable development Tropical cyclones Volcanoes Water Weather edit   Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Wikispecies  Species What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Geography&oldid=709404983" Categories: Geography Geography portals Geography portal Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Bosanski Català Cebuano ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Dansk Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk Gagauz ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? ????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? N?huatl Nederlands ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ???? ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? Scots Seeltersk Shqip ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ????? Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Vèneto Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 10 March 2016, at 18:53. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:History |||Portal:History From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology  History Ancient Egypt Ancient Germanic Culture Ancient Greece Ancient Japan Ancient Near East Ancient Rome Anglo-Saxon England Archaeology Austria-Hungary  British Empire Bulgarian Empire Byzantine Empire Classical civilisation Colonialism Crusades Dacia Disasters German Empire Heraldry History of Canada  History of science Imperial China Indian independence movement Khitan Latter Day Saint movement Middle Ages Mughal Empire New France Ottoman Empire Russian Empire Sasanian Empire Seljuk Empire Soviet Union  War edit   The History Portal This is the Place Monument History is the discovery, collection, organization, analysis, and presentation of information about past events. History can also mean a continuous, typically chronological record of important or public events or of a particular trend or institution. Scholars who write about history are called historians. It is a field of knowledge which uses a narrative to examine and analyse the sequence of events, and it sometimes attempts to objectively investigate the patterns of cause and effect that determine events. Historians debate the nature of history and its usefulness. This includes discussing the study of the discipline as an end in itself and as a way of providing "perspective" on the problems of the present. The stories common to a particular culture but not supported by external sources (such as the legends surrounding King Arthur) are usually classified as cultural heritage rather than as the "disinterested investigation" needed by the discipline of history. Events of the past prior to written record are considered prehistory. Amongst scholars, fifth century BC Greek historian Herodotus is considered to be the "father of history"; the methods of Herodotus along with his contemporary Thucydides form the foundations for the modern study of history. Their influence (along with other historical traditions in other parts of their world) has spawned many different interpretations of the nature of history which has developed over the centuries and are continuing to change. The modern study of history has many different fields, including those that focus on certain regions and those that focus on certain topical or thematic elements of historical investigation. Often, history is taught as part of primary and secondary education, and the academic study of history is a major discipline in university studies. More about History… View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article The formal unification of Germany into a politically and administratively integrated nation state officially occurred on 18 January 1871 at the Versailles Palace's Hall of Mirrors in France. Princes of the German states gathered there to proclaim Wilhelm of Prussia as Emperor Wilhelm of the German Empire after the French capitulation in the Franco-Prussian War. Unofficially, the transition of most of the German-speaking populations into a federated organization of states occurred over nearly a century of experimentation. Unification exposed several glaring religious, linguistic, social, and cultural differences between and among the inhabitants of the new nation, suggesting that 1871 only represents one moment in a continuum of the larger unification processes. The model of diplomatic spheres of influence resulting from the Congress of Vienna in 1814–15 after the Napoleonic Wars endorsed Austrian dominance in Central Europe. However, the negotiators at Vienna took no account of Prussia's growing strength within and among the German states, failing to foresee that Prussia would challenge Austria for leadership within the German states. This German dualism presented two solutions to the problem of unification: Kleindeutsche Lösung, the small Germany solution (Germany without Austria), or Großdeutsche Lösung, greater Germany solution (Germany with Austria). Reaction to Danish and French nationalism provided foci for expressions of German unity. Military successes—especially Prussian ones—in three regional wars generated enthusiasm and pride that politicians could harness to promote unification. This experience echoed the memory of mutual accomplishment in the Napoleonic Wars, particularly in the War of Liberation of 1813–14. By establishing a Germany without Austria, the political and administrative unification in 1871 at least temporarily solved the problem of dualism. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Selected biography Pericles (Greek: ????????, Perikl?s, "surrounded by glory"; c. 495 – 429 BC) was a prominent and influential statesman, orator, and general of Athens during the city's Golden Age—specifically, the time between the Persian and Peloponnesian wars. He was descended, through his mother, from the powerful and historically influential Alcmaeonid family. Pericles had such a profound influence on Athenian society that Thucydides, his contemporary historian, acclaimed him as "the first citizen of Athens". Pericles turned the Delian League into an Athenian empire and led his countrymen during the first two years of the Peloponnesian War. The period during which he led Athens, roughly from 461 to 429 BC, is sometimes known as the "Age of Pericles", though the period thus denoted can include times as early as the Persian Wars, or as late as the next century. Pericles promoted the arts and literature; this was a chief reason Athens holds the reputation of being the educational and cultural centre of the ancient Greek world. He started an ambitious project that generated most of the surviving structures on the Acropolis (including the Parthenon). This project beautified the city, exhibited its glory, and gave work to the people. Furthermore, Pericles fostered Athenian democracy to such an extent that critics call him a populist. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Did you know... ... that on 26 April 1881 HMS Doterel (pictured) exploded, killing 143 of the 155 crew members? ... that causes of the deaths at the Berlin Wall included shooting, drowning, suffocation, suicide, and falling from a balloon? ... that the 19th-century swindler Bertha Heyman, known as "The Confidence Queen," conned men by pretending to be a wealthy woman who was unable to access her fortune? ... that only four great uncial codices have survived until the present day? ... that after World War II, Polish resistance organizer and Warsaw Uprising fighter Jan Mazurkiewicz was brutally tortured by the authorities in communist Poland? ... that tiny Paederus beetles may have caused some of the ten Plagues of Egypt? ... that the only known report of bloodshed during the simulated Nazi invasion of Winnipeg was from a woman who cut her thumb while preparing toast? ... that Dacian bracelets were used as currency and votive offerings? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Selected picture The Trinity nuclear test was the first nuclear detonation in the world. Conducted by the United States Army on July 16, 1945, the successful test would set the stage for the coming Atomic Age. This image, captured by Berlyn Brixner, shows the fireball that developed 0.016 seconds after ignition; the explosive had a yield of 20 kilotons of dynamite. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   On this day April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries edit   Selected quote Victorious warriors win first and then go to war, while defeated warriors go to war first and then seek to win. —?Sun Tzu, Ancient Chinese military strategist ...Archive More... edit   Selected portal Classical civilisation "The ideas which now pass for brilliant innovations and advances are in fact mere revivals of ancient errors, and a further proof of the dictum that those who are ignorant of the past are condemned to repeat it." — Henry Hazlitt ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Things you can do    Here are some Open Tasks : Copy/edit: Hongwu Emperor, Indian independence movement, Modern history, More... Wikify: Merge: More... Requests: , More... Stubs: Panhellenic Liberation Movement, More... Requested pictures - of history topics Are you a historian, i.e. one who studies and writes history, and who has a keen interest in writing outstanding articles? Join our fine group by adding Category:Wikipedian historians to the bottom of your user page. edit   WikiProjects History Ancient Near East • Australian History • Classical Greece and Rome • Dacia • Former countries • History of Canada • Chinese history • European history • Heraldry and vexillology • Indian history • Jewish history • Medieval Scotland • Mesoamerica • Military history • Middle Ages • History of Science Time Days of the Year • Years Biography Composers • Political figures • Saints • United States Presidents   Topics v t e Social sciences Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural linguistics social Economics microeconomics macroeconomics Geography human integrative History cultural economic political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems Political science international relations psephology public administration public policy Psychology abnormal biological cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental (social science studies) Food studies Gender studies Global studies History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Media studies Philosophy of science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Social work Other categorizations Humanities Geisteswissenschaft Human science Index Journals Outline Wikiversity v t e Humanities Anthropology Digital Humanities History Law Literature Performing arts Politics Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts v t e Time Key concepts Human Life Nature Past history deep time Present Future Futures studies Far future in religion Far future in science fiction and popular culture Timeline of the far future Eternity Eternity of the world Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC UT TAI Unit of time Planck time Second Minute Hour Day Week Month Year Decade Century Millennium Tropical year Sidereal year Measurement systems Time zone 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Daylight saving time Solar time Sidereal time Metric time Decimal time Hexadecimal time Calendars Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Lunar Solar Hijri Mayan Intercalation Leap second Leap year Clocks Horology History of timekeeping devices Main types astrarium atomic quantum marine sundial sundial markup schema watch water-based Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Chronicle Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Religion Mythology Dreamtime K?la Kalachakra Prophecy Time and fate deities Wheel of time Immortality Philosophy of time A-series and B-series B-theory of time Causality Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Human experience and use of time Accounting period Chronemics Fiscal year Generation time Mental chronometry Music Procrastination Punctuality Temporal database Term Time discipline Time management Time perception Specious present Time-tracking software Time-use research Time-based currency (time banking) Time value of money Time clock Timesheet Yesterday Time in Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute time and space Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Imaginary time Planck epoch Planck time Proper time Rate Spacetime Theory of relativity Time dilation gravitational Time domain T-symmetry other subject areas Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Dating methodologies in archaeology Time geography Related topics Carpe diem Clock position Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time complexity Time signature Time travel Time portal v t e Chronology Key topics Archaeology Astronomy Geology History Human Life Nature Paleontology Time Eras Epochs Calendar eras Human Era Ab urbe condita Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Mundi Byzantine era Seleucid era Spanish era Before Present Hijri Egyptian Sothic cycle Hindu units of time (Yuga) Mesoamerican Long Count Short Count Tzolk'in Haab' Regnal year Canon of Kings Lists of kings Limmu Era names Chinese Japanese Korean Vietnamese Calendars Pre-Julian / Julian Pre-Julian Roman Original Julian Proleptic Julian Revised Julian Gregorian Gregorian Proleptic Gregorian Old Style and New Style dates Adoption of the Gregorian calendar Dual dating Astronomical Lunisolar Solar Lunar Astronomical year numbering Others Chinese sexagenary cycle Geologic Calendar Hebrew Iranian Islamic ISO week date Mesoamerican Maya Aztec Winter count (Plains Indians) Astronomic time Cosmic Calendar Ephemeris Galactic year Metonic cycle Milankovitch cycles Geologic time Concepts Deep time Geological history of Earth Geological time units Standards Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA) Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) Methods Chronostratigraphy Geochronology Isotope geochemistry Law of superposition Luminescence dating Samarium-neodymium dating Chronological dating Absolute dating Amino acid racemisation Archaeomagnetic dating Dendrochronology Ice core Incremental dating Lichenometry Paleomagnetism Radiometric dating Radiocarbon Uranium–lead Potassium-argon Tephrochronology Luminescence dating Relative dating Fluorine absorption Nitrogen dating Obsidian hydration Seriation Stratigraphy Genetic methods Molecular clock Linguistic methods Glottochronology Related topics Chronicle New Chronology Periodization Synchronoptic view Timeline Year Zero Circa Floruit Terminus post quem ASPRO chronology Portal edit   Categories History • By period • By region • By topic • By ethnic group • Historiography • Archaeology • Books • Documents • Maps • Images • Magazines • Organizations • Fictional • Museums • Pseudohistory • Stubs • Timelines • Chronology • People • Wikipedia historians ? History ? History by ethnic group ? History by location ? History by period ? History by topic ? Fields of history ? Historians ? History-related lists ? History awards ? Bible history ? Chronology ? Historical controversies ? Economic, social and political strategies ? History education ? Historical eras ? Events ? Historically themed events ? Historical geography ? Historicity ? Historiography ? Legacies ? Media history ? Historical objects ? Oral history ? History organizations ? Phaleristics ? Philosophy of history ? Historic preservation ? Pseudohistory ? Sacred history ? Theories of history ? Historical timelines ? Works about history ? World history ? Wikipedia books on history ? History images ? History stubs   Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Wikispecies  Species What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:History&oldid=749756545" Categories: History portal History portals History Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikisource Wikiversity Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ??????? ?????? ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Euskara ????? Français Frysk Gagauz Galego G?k?y? ??? ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? ?????? ????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? Nederlands ??? Napulitano ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ?????? ???? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? West-Vlams Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 16 November 2016, at 00:57. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Mathematics |||Portal:Mathematics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology edit   The Mathematics Portal Square root Mathematics is the study of numbers, quantity, space, structure, and change. Mathematics is used throughout the world as an essential tool in many fields, including natural science, engineering, medicine, and the social sciences. Applied mathematics, the branch of mathematics concerned with application of mathematical knowledge to other fields, inspires and makes use of new mathematical discoveries and sometimes leads to the development of entirely new mathematical disciplines, such as statistics and game theory. Mathematicians also engage in pure mathematics, or mathematics for its own sake, without having any application in mind. There is no clear line separating pure and applied mathematics, and practical applications for what began as pure mathematics are often discovered. More about Mathematics... Selected article | Selected picture | Did you know... | Topics in mathematics Categories | WikiProjects | Things you can do | Index | Related portals There are approximately 31,444 mathematics articles in Wikipedia. View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article Carl Friedrich Gauss Image credit: C.A. Jensen (1792-1870) Carl Friedrich Gauss (30 April 1777 – 23 February 1855) was a German mathematician and scientist of profound genius who contributed significantly to many fields, including number theory, analysis, differential geometry, geodesy, electricity, magnetism, astronomy and optics. Known as "the prince of mathematicians" and "greatest mathematician since antiquity", Gauss had a remarkable influence in many fields of mathematics and science and is ranked as one of history's most influential mathematicians. Gauss was a child prodigy, of whom there are many anecdotes pertaining to his astounding precocity while a mere toddler, and made his first ground-breaking mathematical discoveries while still a teenager. He completed Disquisitiones Arithmeticae, his magnum opus, at the age of twenty-one (1798), though it wasn't published until 1801. This work was fundamental in consolidating number theory as a discipline and has shaped the field to the present day. View all selected articles Read More... edit   Selected picture Credit: BenFrantzDale A Lorenz curve shows the distribution of income in a population by plotting the percentage y of total income that is earned by the bottom x percent of households (or individuals). Developed by economist Max O. Lorenz in 1905 to describe income inequality, the curve is typically plotted with a diagonal line (reflecting a hypothetical "equal" distribution of incomes) for comparison. This leads naturally to a derived quantity called the Gini coefficient, first published in 1912 by Corrado Gini, which is the ratio of the area between the diagonal line and the curve (area A in this graph) to the area under the diagonal line (the sum of A and B); higher Gini coefficients reflect more income inequality. Lorenz's curve is a special kind of cumulative distribution function used to characterize quantities that follow a Pareto distribution, a type of power law. More specifically, it can be used to illustrate the Pareto principle, a rule of thumb stating that roughly 80% of the identified "effects" in a given phenomenon under study will come from 20% of the "causes" (in the first decade of the 20th century Vilfredo Pareto showed that 80% of the land in Italy was owned by 20% of the population). As this so-called "80–20 rule" implies a specific level of inequality (i.e., a specific power law), more or less extreme cases are possible. For example, in the United States in the first half of the 2010s, 95% of the financial wealth was held by the top 20% of wealthiest households (in 2010), the top 1% of individuals held approximately 40% of the wealth (2012), and the top 1% of income earners received approximately 20% of the pre-tax income (2013). Observations such as these have brought income and wealth inequality into popular consciousness and have given rise to various slogans about "the 1%" versus "the 99%". More selected pictures... Read more... edit   Did you know... ... that economists blame market failures on non-convexity? ... that, according to the pizza theorem, a circular pizza that is sliced off-center into eight equal-angled wedges can still be divided equally between two people? ... that the clique problem of programming a computer to find complete subgraphs in an undirected graph was first studied as a way to find groups of people who all know each other in social networks? ... that the Herschel graph is the smallest possible polyhedral graph that does not have a Hamiltonian cycle? ... that the Life without Death cellular automaton, a mathematical model of pattern formation, is a variant of Conway's Game of Life in which cells, once brought to life, never die? ... that one can list every positive rational number without repetition by breadth-first traversal of the Calkin–Wilf tree? ... that the Hadwiger conjecture implies that the external surface of any three-dimensional convex body can be illuminated by only eight light sources, but the best proven bound is that 16 lights are sufficient?                           Showing 7 items out of 72 More did you know edit   WikiProjects The Mathematics WikiProject is the center for mathematics-related editing on Wikipedia. Join the discussion on the project's talk page. Project pages Participants Current activity Manual of style Conventions Essays Advice on using Wikipedia for mathematics self-study Proofs Subprojects PlanetMath Exchange (Talk) Graphics (Talk) Article assessment (Talk) Related projects Computer science | Cryptography | Game theory | Numbers | Physics | Science | Statistics edit   Things you can do Create a new article: See requested articles list Add a new image: Requested images list Improve articles: Pages needing attention (Category) Expand articles: Mathematics stubs edit   Categories Algebra | Arithmetic | Analysis | Complex analysis | Applied mathematics | Calculus | Category theory | Chaos theory | Combinatorics | Dynamic systems | Fractals | Game theory | Geometry | Algebraic geometry | Graph theory | Group theory | Linear algebra | Mathematical logic | Model theory | Multi-dimensional geometry | Number theory | Numerical analysis | Optimization | Order theory | Probability and statistics | Set theory | Statistics | Topology | Algebraic topology | Trigonometry | Linear programming Mathematics (books) | History of mathematics | Mathematicians | Awards | Education | Literature | Notation | Organizations | Theorems | Proofs | Unsolved problems ? Mathematics ? Fields of mathematics ? Mathematics-related lists ? Mathematicians ? Mathematical concepts ? Mathematics and culture ? Mathematical examples ? History of mathematics ? Mathematics and art ? Mathematical modeling ? Mathematical notation ? Mathematical science occupations ? Philosophy of mathematics ? Mathematical projects ? Mathematical proofs ? Pseudomathematics ? Set indices on mathematics ? Mathematical terminology ? Mathematics textbooks ? Mathematical theorems ? Mathematical tools ? Women in mathematics ? Wikipedia books on mathematics ? Mathematics stubs More mathematics categories edit   Topics in mathematics General Foundations Number theory Discrete mathematics Mathematicians History of mathematics Philosophy of mathematics Mathematical notation Mathematical beauty Mathematics education Areas of mathematics List of basic mathematics topics List of mathematical symbols Wikipedia Books: Mathematics Foundations of mathematics Mathematical logic Proof theory Gödel's incompleteness theorems Model theory Recursion theory Set theory (portal) Naive set theory Axiomatic set theory Category theory (portal) Topos theory Number theory (portal) Algebraic number theory Analytic number theory Arithmetic Fundamental theorem of arithmetic Numbers Natural numbers Prime numbers Rational numbers Algebraic numbers Discrete mathematics (portal) Combinatorics Combinatorial geometry Coding theory Combinatorial design Enumerative combinatorics Combinatorial optimization Graph theory Order theory Lattice theory Algebra Analysis Geometry and topology Applied mathematics Algebra (portal) Elementary algebra Abstract algebra Group theory Ring theory Field theory Commutative algebra Geometric algebra Linear algebra Matrix theory Multilinear algebra Universal algebra Fundamental theorem of algebra Analysis (portal) Calculus Fundamental theorem of calculus Vector calculus Geometric calculus Measure theory Real analysis Complex analysis Differential equations Ordinary differential equations Partial differential equations Integral equations Approximation theory Special functions Potential theory Harmonic analysis Fourier analysis Functional analysis Operator theory Geometry (portal) Euclidean geometry Trigonometry Analytic geometry Non-Euclidean geometry Affine geometry Projective geometry Convex geometry Discrete geometry Algebraic geometry Differential geometry Riemannian geometry Lie groups Topology (portal) General topology Algebraic topology Geometric topology Differential topology Applied mathematics Mathematical modeling Mathematical physics Dynamical systems Control theory Calculus of variations Optimization Mathematical economics Game theory Mathematical finance Statistics (portal) Probability theory Stochastic processes Numerical analysis Theoretical computer science Computability theory Complexity theory Cryptography (portal) Information theory edit   Index of mathematics articles ARTICLE INDEX: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z (0–9) MATHEMATICIANS: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z edit   Related portals Algebra Analysis Category theory Computer science Cryptography Discrete mathematics Geometry Logic Mathematics Number theory Physics Science Set theory Statistics Topology Science History of science    Philosophy of science    Systems science    Mathematics    Biology    Chemistry    Physics    Earth sciences    Technology    What are portals? List of portals edit   In other Wikimedia projects The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Mathematics&oldid=686628022" Categories: Mathematics portal Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikinews Wikisource Wikiversity Languages ???? ??????? ???? ????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français G?k?y? ??? ??????? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Lietuvi? Lumbaart Magyar ?????????? Malti Bahasa Melayu ?????????? Nederlands ??? O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? Shqip ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Suomi Svenska ????? Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 20 October 2015, at 08:24. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Science |||Portal:Science From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Science History of science    Philosophy of science    Systems science    Mathematics    Biology    Chemistry    Physics    Earth sciences    Technology    Main page   Categories & Main topics   Related portals & WikiProjects   Things you can do edit The Science Portal For a topic outline of science, see Outline of science. Meissner effect Science is the methodical study of nature including testable explanations and predictions. From classical antiquity through the 19th century, science as a type of knowledge was more closely linked to philosophy than it is now and, in fact, in the Western world, the term "natural philosophy" encompassed fields of study that are today associated with science, such as astronomy, medicine, and physics. However, during the Islamic Golden Age foundations for the scientific method were laid by Ibn al-Haytham in his Book of Optics. While the classification of the material world by the ancient Indians and Greeks into air, earth, fire and water was more philosophical, medieval Middle Easterns used practical, experimental observation to classify materials. Today, the ever-evolving term "science" refers to the pursuit of knowledge, not the knowledge itself. It is often synonymous with "natural and physical science" and often restricted to those branches of study relating to the phenomena of the material universe and their laws. Although the term implies exclusion of pure mathematics, many university faculties include Mathematics Departments within their Faculty of Science. The dominant sense in ordinary use has a narrower use for the term "science." It developed as a part of science becoming a distinct enterprise of defining the "laws of nature"; early examples include Kepler's laws, Galileo's laws, and Newton's laws of motion. In this period it became more common to refer to natural philosophy as "natural science." Over the course of the 19th century, the word "science" became increasingly associated with the disciplined study of the natural world, including physics, chemistry, geology and biology. This sometimes left the study of human thought and society in a linguistic limbo, which was resolved by classifying these areas of academic study as social science. For example, psychology evolved from philosophy, and has grown into an area of study. Currently, there are both "hard" (e.g. biological psychology) and "soft" science (e.g. social psychology) fields within the discipline. As a result, and as is consistent with the unfolding of the study of knowledge and development of methods to establish facts, each area of psychology employs a scientific method. Reflecting the evolution of the development of knowledge and established facts and the use of the scientific method, Psychology Departments in universities are found within: Faculty of Arts and Science, Faculty of Arts, and a Faculty of Science. Similarly, several other major areas of disciplined study and knowledge exist today under the general rubric of "science", such as formal science and applied science. More about Science... View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article A space elevator is a hypothetical structure designed to transport material from a planet's surface into space. Many different types of space elevator structures have been proposed. They all share the goal of replacing rocket propulsion with the traversal of a fixed structure via a mechanism not unlike an elevator, hence its name, in order to move material into or beyond orbit. Space elevators have also sometimes been referred to as space bridges, beanstalks, space ladders or space lifts. The most common proposal is a tether (usually a cable or ribbon) that spans from the surface to a point beyond geosynchronous orbit. As the planet rotates, the inertia at the end of the tether counteracts gravity and keeps the tether taut. Vehicles can then climb the tether and escape the planet's gravity without the use of rockets. Such a structure could eventually permit delivery of great quantities of cargo and people to orbit, and at costs only a fraction of those associated with current means. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Selected picture Credit: Earth Sciences and Image Analysis Laboratory, NASA View of the Earth as seen by the Apollo 17 crew traveling toward the moon. This translunar coast photograph extends from the Mediterranean Sea area to the Antarctica south polar ice cap. This is toward the northeast. Earth, also known as Terra, and (mostly in the 19th century) Tellus, is the third-closest planet to the Sun. It is the largest of the solar system's terrestrial planets and the only planetary body that modern science confirms as harboring life. Scientific evidence indicates that the planet formed around 4.57 billion years ago, and shortly thereafter (4.533 billion years ago) acquired its single natural satellite, the Moon. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Selected biography Carl Edward Sagan (November 9, 1934 – December 20, 1996) was an American astronomer, astrobiologist, and highly successful science popularizer. He pioneered exobiology and promoted the Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence (SETI). He is world-famous for writing popular science books and for co-writing and presenting the award-winning 1980 television series Cosmos: A Personal Voyage, which was the most-watched PBS program until Ken Burns' The Civil War in 1990. A book to accompany the program was also published. He also wrote the novel Contact, the basis for the 1997 film of the same name starring Jodie Foster. During his lifetime, Sagan published more than 600 scientific papers and popular articles and was author, co-author, or editor of more than 20 books. In his works, he frequently advocated scientific skepticism, humanism, and the scientific method. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Did you know... ...that the endangered golden lion tamarin (pictured) has a long, but not prehensile, tail? ...that the Witch's hat is the common name of a colourful orange-red toadstool? ...that Grandi's series 1 ? 1 + 1 ? 1 + • • • is divergent and appears to equal 0, yet in some sense "sums" to 1?2 — a paradox once linked to the creation ex nihilo of the universe? ...that Derek Freeman was an anthropologist whose refutation of Margaret Mead's work "ignited controversy of a scale, visibility, and ferocity never before seen in anthropology"? ...that the New Year's Eve snowstorm of 1963/1964 dropped over 17 inches of snow at Huntsville, Alabama, simultaneously setting new snowfall records for any day, week, or month in their history? ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Associated Wikimedia Science portal on Wikinews     Science on Wikiquote     Science subject on Wikibooks     Science portal on Wikisource     Science category on Wikicommons     Science category on Wiktionary     Wikiversity School of Science News Quotations Manuals Texts Images Definitions Learning Wikipedia's Portals All Portals Overview Glossaries Indices Lists Outlines Categories Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Featured portals About portals Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Science&oldid=714543061" Categories: Science portal Science Science portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikinews Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Català Cebuano Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Limburgs ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ????? Oromoo O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ?????? Português Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ??????? Seeltersk Setswana ????? ???? Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ?????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? ?? Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?????? ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 10 April 2016, at 11:29. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Society |||Portal:Society From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Sociology portals: Arts · Anthropology · Community · Culture · Economics · Education · Geography · Gender studies · Globalization · History · Human rights · Internet · Law · Philosophy · Social movements · Social sciences · Social welfare and social work · Society edit   The Society Portal Social network analysis diagram A human society is a group of people related to each other through continued relations, or a large social grouping sharing the same geographical or virtual territory, same interests, subject to the same political authority and dominant cultural expectations. Human societies are characterized by patterns of relationships (social relations) between individuals who share a distinctive culture and institutions. A given society may be described as the sum total of such relationships among its constituent members. In the social sciences, a larger society often evinces stratification and/or dominance patterns in subgroups. In so far as it is collaborative, a society can enable its members to benefit in ways that would not otherwise be possible on an individual basis; both individual and social (common) benefits can thus be distinguished, or in many cases found to overlap. A society can also consist of like-minded people governed by their own norms and values within a dominant, larger society. This is sometimes referred to as a subculture, a term used extensively within criminology: an organized group working together having a common interests, beliefs, or profession. More broadly, a society may be described as an economic, social, or industrial infrastructure, made up of a varied collection of individuals or subgroups. Members of a society may be from different ethnic groups. A society can be a particular ethnic group, such as the Saxons; a nation state, such as Bhutan; or a broader cultural group, such as a Western society. The word society may also refer to an organized voluntary association of people for religious, benevolent, cultural, scientific, political, patriotic, or other purposes. A "society" may also be a group of social organisms such as an ant colony, or any cooperative aggregate such as, for example, in some formulations of artificial intelligence. More about society… View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article The Tamil people are an ethnic group from South Asia with a recorded history going back almost two millennia. The oldest Tamil communities are those of southern India and north-eastern Sri Lanka. Unlike many ethnic groups, the Tamils have at no time been governed by a single political entity; Tamil?akam, the traditional name for the Tamil lands, has always been under the rule of more than one kingdom or state. Despite this, the Tamil cultural identity has always been strong. Historically, this identity has been primarily linguistic, with Tamils being those whose first language was Tamil. In recent times, however, the definition has been broadened to also include emigrants of Tamil descent who maintain Tamil traditions, even when they no longer speak the language. Tamils are ethnically, linguistically and culturally related to the other Dravidian peoples of South Asia. There are an estimated 74 million Tamils around the world. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured picture Credit: Photo: Marcello Casal Jr, Agência Brasil A United Nations vehicle patrols the streets of the Bel-Air neighborhood of Port-au-Prince in the aftermath of the catastrophic 2010 Haiti earthquake. The earthquake occurred at 16:53 local time (21:53 UTC) on Tuesday, 12 January 2010. An estimated three million people were affected by the earthquake, with an estimated 280,000 buildings severely damaged or destroyed. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Did you know... ... that the desert plants pale wolfberry (pictured) and Berlandier's wolfberry were both used by native Americans for medicinal purposes? ... that the Central Committee of the Commission for Organizing the Party of the Working People of Ethiopia included only one woman? ... that in 1992 the leader of the Gambela People's Liberation Movement, Agwa Alemu, was killed by his own troops? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Anniversaries this month 4 April 1930 - Foundation of the American Rocket Society, originally named the American Interplanetary Society 13 April 1564 - Pope Pius IV approved the Society of the Holy Name 19 April 1866 - First anti-cruelty law was passed since the founding of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Brooklyn chapter pictured) 22 April 2008 - IEEE Power Engineering Society changed its name to IEEE Power & Energy Society More anniversaries... edit   Selected biography Dyer Daniel Lum (1839–April 6, 1893) was a 19th-century American anarchist labor activist and poet. A leading anarcho-syndicalist and a prominent left-wing intellectual of the 1880s, he is remembered as the lover and mentor of early anarcha-feminist Voltairine de Cleyre. Lum was a prolific writer who wrote a number of key anarchist texts, and contributed to publications including Mother Earth, Twentieth Century, Liberty (Benjamin Tucker's individualist anarchist journal), The Alarm (the journal of the International Working People's Association) and The Open Court among others. Following the arrest of Albert Parsons, Lum edited The Alarm from 1892–1893. Traditionally portrayed as a "genteel, theoretical anarchist", Lum has recently been recast by the scholarship of Paul Avrich as an "uncompromising rebel thirsty for violence and martyrdom" in the light of his involvement in the Haymarket affair in 1886. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured audio January 28, 2008 – State of the Union Address by President George W. Bush George W. Bush's address, given on the first floor of the House of Representatives at the Capitol. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories Society ? Society portal ? Society by continent ? Society by nationality ? Sociology ? Fictional society ? Anti-social behaviour ? Business ? Civil society ? Clubs and societies ? Communication ? Corporate groups ? Crime ? Culture ? Disability ? Economics ? Education ? Social events ? Family ? Feminism and society ? Society in fiction ? Folklore ? Health ? Social history ? Home ? Humans ? Inequality ? Social institutions ? Social issues ? Society-related lists ? Mating systems ? Matronymics ? Medicine in society ? Military ? Society museums ? Nationality ? Organizations ? Patronymics ? People ? Philosophy and society ? Politics ? Postindustrial society ? Private law ? Race and society ? Religion and society ? Rural society ? Science in society ? Sexuality and society ? Social change ? Social media ? Social responsibility ? Social sciences ? Social work ? Socioeconomics ? Technology in society ? Water and society ? Wikipedia books on society ? Society portals edit   WikiProjects Related projects Community Ethnic groups Family and relationships Former countries Gender Studies LGBT studies Literature Sexology and sexuality Sociology Travel and Tourism What are WikiProjects? edit   Selected quote “ The basic discovery about any people is the discovery of the relationship between its men and its women. ” — Pearl S. Buck ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Recognized content Featured articles 2012 phenomenon W. E. B. Du Bois Female genital mutilation From The Doctor to my son Thomas Fuck (film) Fuck: Word Taboo and Protecting Our First Amendment Liberties Featured lists List of awards and nominations received by Penn & Teller: Bullshit! Good articles Timeline of the Egyptian revolution of 2011 Acting white African Americans in Omaha, Nebraska Agnosticism America's 60 Families Anarchism Anarchism in Cuba Anonymous (group) Anti-nuclear movement in Australia Archaeoastronomy Average Joe Balangoda Man Before the Dawn (book) Birth control Black Lives Matter Boerehaat The Bog People Bomis A Community of Witches Compulsory Miseducation Cult film Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact Culture of the Song dynasty Cutting the Mustard The Daily Stormer Demographics of the Supreme Court of the United States Diaphoneme Double burden Dreamtime (book) Émile Durkheim EST and The Forum in popular culture Ely and Littleport riots of 1816 Family in advertising Family structure in the United States Feminism Feminist economics The finger First World First interracial kiss on television Forensic anthropology Free Expression Policy Project Fucking Machines God's Choice Erving Goffman History of agriculture Hitachi Magic Wand Hooray Henry I Ching Globalization and women in China Insects in culture Ivatan people Java Man Joint custody (United States) Ralph Larkin Lesbian LGBT Long hair Magic, Witchcraft and the Otherworld The Man-Eating Myth March of loyalty to martyrs Karl Marx Josef Mengele A More Perfect Union: Advancing New American Rights Mork Goes Erk No Lifeguard on Duty Nonviolent Communication Not My Presidents Day Not in Front of the Children On the Internet, nobody knows you're a dog Otaku Polyethnicity Protests against the Sri Lankan Civil War in Canada Proto-globalization Racial wage gap in the United States Reborn doll The Road to Total Freedom Romania in the Early Middle Ages Royal intermarriage Edward Said Sex, Sin, and Blasphemy Sheng nu Social identity theory Sociology of leisure Sociology Stay-at-home dad Sustainability Team effectiveness Think of the children Truce term Max Weber Benjamin Lee Whorf Florian Znaniecki Featured pictures File:Jane Addams - Bain News Service.jpg edit   Things you can do Here are some tasks awaiting attention: Article requests?: Check article requests in Business and economics topics • Social sciences topics • Requested pictures of society topics Assess?: Check article deletion discussions listed at Deletion sorting – Social science Cleanup?: check new articles for cleanup from Sociology-related new article feed Copyedit?: Check Sociology article alerts for interesting articles to copyedit Expand?: Expand articles in categories including: Culture, Law, Education, Politics Featured article candidates?: Review society-related articles submitted at Featured Article candidates, especially those at FAC urgents Good article nominations?: Check out articles under review for Good Article candidacy, in the Social sciences and society section Maintain?: Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Stubs?: Take on project for improvement of one of the Sociology stubs Verify?: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability edit   Related portals Arts Biography Community Culture Death Education Freedom of speech Human rights Internet Law LGBT Mind and brain Philosophy Politics Religion Sexuality Social movements Sociology Technology Writing edit   Web resources Society at DMOZ Definition of Society from the OED. Lecture notes on "Defining Society" from East Carolina University. Internet Modern History Sourcebook: Industrial Revolution "The Day the World Took Off" Six part video series from the University of Cambridge tracing the question "Why did the Industrial Revolution begin when and where it did." BBC History Home Page – Industrial Revolution National Museum of Science and Industry website – machines and personalities Industrial Revolution and the Standard of Living by Clark Nardinelli - the debate over whether standards of living rose or fell. Cliff Notes on Types of Societies edit   Associated Wikimedia Society on Wikibooks  Society on Wikimedia Commons Society on Wikinews  Society on Wikiquote  Society on Wikisource  Society on Wikiversity  Society on Wiktionary  Manuals and books Images and media News Quotations Texts Learning resources Definitions What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Society&oldid=649229924" Categories: Society portal Society Society portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ??????? ???? ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? Català Cebuano Deutsch Eesti ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? Bahasa Indonesia ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Lëtzebuergesch ?????????? Nederlands ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ?????? Polski Português ??????? ????? Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Suomi ???????/tatarça Türkçe ???? ?????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 28 February 2015, at 14:11. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology |||Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Science History of science    Philosophy of science    Systems science    Mathematics    Biology    Chemistry    Physics    Earth sciences    Technology    edit   The Technology Portal Astronaut Technology is the practical use of science, including the making, modification or improvement, applied activity or behavior, use and knowledge of tools, machines, techniques, crafts, systems, methods of organization, or environmental modifications or arrangement in order to solve a problem, improve a preexisting solution to a problem, achieve a goal or perform a specific function. It can also refer to the collection of such tools, machinery, modifications, environmental arrangement and procedures. Technologies significantly affect human as well as other animal species' ability to control and adapt to their natural environments. The word technology comes from Greek ?????????? (technología); from ????? (téchn?), meaning 'art, skill, craft', and -????? (-logía), meaning 'study of-'. The term can be applied either generally or to many specific areas, examples of which include construction technology, medical technology and information technology. The human species' use of technology began with the conversion of natural resources into simple tools. The prehistorical discovery of the ability to control fire increased the available sources of food and the invention of the wheel helped humans in travelling in and controlling their environment. Recent technological developments, including the printing press, the telephone, and the Internet, have lessened physical barriers to communication and allowed humans to interact freely on a global scale. However, not all technology has been used for peaceful purposes; the development of weapons of ever-increasing destructive power has progressed throughout history, from clubs to nuclear weapons. Technology has affected society and its surroundings in a number of ways. In many societies, technology has helped develop more advanced economies (including today's global economy) and has allowed the rise of a leisure class. Many technological processes produce unwanted by-products, known as pollution, and deplete natural resources, to the detriment of the Earth and its environment. Various implementations of technology influence the values of a society and new technology often raises new ethical questions. Examples include the rise of the notion of efficiency in terms of human productivity, a term originally applied only to machines, and the challenge of traditional norms. Philosophical debates have arisen over the present and future use of technology in society, with disagreements over whether technology improves the human condition or worsens it. Neo-Luddism, anarcho-primitivism, and similar movements criticise the pervasiveness of technology in the modern world, opining that it harms the environment and alienates people; proponents of ideologies such as transhumanism and techno-progressivism view continued technological progress as beneficial to society and the human condition. Indeed, until recently, it was believed that the development of technology was restricted only to human beings, but recent scientific studies indicate that other primates and certain dolphin communities have developed simple tools and learned to pass their knowledge to other generations. More about Technology... Refresh selections edit   Selected article The Hanford Site is a decommissioned nuclear production complex on the Columbia River in south-central Washington operated by the United States government. Established in 1943 as part of the Manhattan Project, it was home to the B-Reactor, the first full-scale plutonium production reactor in the world. During the Cold War, the project was expanded to include nine nuclear reactors and five massive plutonium processing complexes, which produced plutonium for most of the 60,000 weapons in the U.S. nuclear arsenal. Nuclear technology developed rapidly during this period, and Hanford scientists produced many notable technological achievements. However, many of the early safety procedures and waste disposal practices were inadequate. Government documents have since confirmed that Hanford's operations released significant amounts of radioactive materials to the air and to the Columbia River, threatening the health of residents and ecosystems. Today, Hanford is the most contaminated nuclear site in the United States and is the focus of the nation's largest environmental cleanup effort. While most of the current activity at the site is related to the cleanup project, Hanford also hosts a commercial nuclear power plant, the Columbia Generating Station, and various centers for scientific research and development. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   In this month 2 April 1975 – Construction of the CN Tower in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, tops out, beginning the 553.33 metres (1,815.4 ft) tower's 34 year reign as the world's tallest free-standing structure 3 April 2010 – The first iPad (pictured) is released by Apple, Inc. 10 April 1861 – Governor of Massachusetts John Albion Andrew signs a charter incorporating the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 15 April 1912 – The RMS Titanic, at the time the world's largest ship, sinks after hitting an iceberg the night before in one of the deadliest peacetime maritime disasters in history More anniversaries... edit   Did you know... ... that in 2010, three of the four largest power stations in the world were in South America? ... that a Rans S-6 Coyote II (pictured), a type of homebuilt aircraft, has flown across the Atlantic Ocean twice? ... that Stephen Fry asked on Twitter for suggestions to name a BBC television series on the impact of the Internet, now called The Virtual Revolution? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured biography John Douglas (1830–1911) was an English architect who designed about 500 buildings in Cheshire, North Wales and northwest England, in particular in the estate of Eaton Hall. Douglas' output included the creation, restoration and renovation of churches, church furnishings, houses and other buildings. His architectural styles were eclectic and many of his works incorporate elements of the English Gothic style. He was also influenced by architectural styles from the mainland of Europe and included elements of French, German and Netherlandish architecture into his works. He is remembered for his use of half-timbering, tile-hanging, pargeting, decorative brick in diapering and the design of tall chimney stacks. Of particular importance is Douglas' use of joinery and highly detailed wood carving. Throughout his career he attracted commissions from wealthy landowners and industrialists. Most of his works have survived. The city of Chester contains a number of his structures, the most admired of which are his half-timbered black-and-white buildings and Eastgate Clock. The highest concentration of his work is found in the Eaton Hall estate and the surrounding villages of Eccleston, Aldford and Pulford. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Wikiprojects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Telecommunications Woodworking What are WikiProjects? edit   Selected quote “ If the Internet teaches us anything, it is that great value comes from leaving core resources in a commons, where they're free for people to build upon as they see fit. ” — Lawrence Lessig, (2001) ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Selected picture Credit: Maas Digital LLC NASA's Mars Exploration Rover Mission (MER) is an ongoing robotic space mission involving two rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, exploring the planet Mars. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories Computing · Classes of computers · Companies · Computer architecture · Computer model · Computer science · Computer security · Computing and society · Data · Embedded systems · Information systems · Information technology · Internet · Languages · Multimedia · Networks · Operating systems · Platforms · Product lifecycle management · Real-time computing · Software · Security ·More... Electronics · Avionics · RF & MMIC Design · Circuits · Companies · Connectors · Consumer electronics · Digital electronics · Digital media · Electrical components · Electronic design · Electronics manufacturing · Embedded systems · Integrated circuits · Microwave technology · Molecular electronics · Water technology · Optoelectronics · Quantum electronics · Radio-frequency identification · Radio electronics · Semiconductors · Signal cables · Surveillance · Telecommunications · Terminology · More... Engineering: Aerospace engineering · Biological engineering · Chemical engineering · Civil engineering · Computer engineering · Electrical engineering · Electronic engineering · Environmental engineering · Geotechnical engineering · Industrial engineering · Marine engineering · Materials science · Mechanical engineering · Nuclear technology · Signal processing · Software engineering · Structural engineering Transport · Aviation · Rail transport · Spaceflight · Road transport · Water transport Timelines: Technology timelines Other sub-categories: Agriculture · Animation · Architecture · Carpentry · Communications · Education · Electrical wiring · Machining · Manufacturing · Medicine · Metalworking · Optics · Plumbing · Tools · Welding · Woodworking edit   Main topics Technology Technological concepts and issues – Appropriate technology • Clean technology • Diffusion of innovations in science • Doomsday device • Ecotechnology • Environmental technology • High technology • History of science and technology • History of technology • Industry • Innovation • Knowledge economy • Persuasion technology • Pollution • Posthumanism • Precautionary principle • Research and development • Science, technology, and society • Strategy of technology • Superpowers • Sustainable technology • Technicism • Technocapitalism • Technocriticism • Techno-progressivism • Technological convergence • Technological evolution • Technological determinism • Technological diffusion • Technological singularity • Technology acceptance model • Technology assessment • Technology lifecycle • Technology transfer • Technology Tree • Technorealism • Timeline of invention • Transhumanism Technologies and applied sciences – Aerospace • Agriculture, Agricultural science & Agronomy • Architecture • Artificial intelligence • Automation • Automobile • Big Science • Biotechnology • Cartography • Chemical engineering • Communication • Computing (Computer science, List of open problems in computer science, Programming, Software engineering, Information technology, Computer engineering) • Construction • Design • Electronics • Energy development • Energy storage • Engineering • Ergonomics • Firefighting • Forensics • Forestry • Free software • Health sciences • Health Informatics • Industry • Information science • Internet • Library and information science • Machines • Management • Manufacturing • Mass communication • Mass production • Medicine (Unsolved problems in neuroscience) • Military science • Military technology and equipment • Mining • Nanotechnology • Nuclear technology • Packaging and labeling • Processes • Robotics • Space exploration • Technology forecasting • Telecommunications • Tools • Transport • Vehicles • Weapons edit   News From the Wikinews Science and technology portal April 8: GNOME to be Ubuntu's default desktop environment, Canonical to stop investing in Ubuntu Phone March 27: President Trump tells NASA to aim for Mars March 22: Jeff Jones resigns as president of Uber March 9: Scientists say excess cerebrospinal fluid may serve as early sign of autism February 9: Scientists say new medical diagnostic chip can sort cells anywhere with an inkjet January 15: Geneticists produce laser-activated killer mice January 4: Slow-cooking dinosaur eggs may have contributed to extinction, say scientists December 29: Around 7,100 cheetahs remain, say experts December 26: Study confirms efficacy of NewLink Genetics ebola vaccine December 11: Scientists find dinosaur feathers preserved in amber edit   Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures edit   Related portals Agriculture and Agronomy Astronomy Aviation Biotechnology Bridges Computer science Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Health Infrastructure Information technology Mathematics Medicine Nanotechnology Nuclear technology Philosophy of science Radio Renewable energy Robotics Science Software Spaceflight Sustainable development Telecom Television Trains Transport War edit   Associated Wikimedia Technology on Wikibooks  Technology on Wikimedia Commons Technology on Wikinews  Technology on Wikiquote  Technology on Wikisource  Technology on Wikiversity  Technology on Wiktionary  Manuals and books Images and media News Quotations Texts Learning resources Definitions edit   Wikipedia's portals All Portals Overview Glossaries Indices Lists Outlines Categories Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Featured portals About portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=737901506" Categories: Technology portal Technology portals Technology Science portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages ???? ??????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? Bahasa Indonesia ????? ??????? Kurdî Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? Nederlands ??? ??????? Occitan ????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ?????? ??????? Suomi Svenska ????? Taqbaylit Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? ???? Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 5 September 2016, at 18:25. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Contents/Portals |||Portal:Contents/Portals From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia < Portal:Contents Jump to: navigation, search Contents Overview Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology edit  watch   Wikipedia's contents: Portals General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places    Health and fitness     History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences    People and self    Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences About portals · Portal directory · Portals category Shortcuts: P: P:CP WP:8 WP:PORT Portals complement main topics in Wikipedia, and expound upon topics by introducing the reader to key articles, images, and categories that further describe the subject and its related topics. Portals also assist in helping editors to find related projects and things they can do to improve Wikipedia, and provide a unique way to navigate Wikipedia topics. At present, there are 1491 portals. WikiProject Directory Regional Notice Boards You can also use the Special:Search box below to locate Portals and sub-pages. edit  watch   General reference   (see in all page types) Library and information science edit  watch   Culture and the arts   (see in all page types) Culture Language: Constructed languages (Esperanto), English Arts (Aesthetics) Literature: Books • Comics • Children's literature • French literature • Poetry • Writing Authors: Jane Austen • Charles Dickens • William Shakespeare • Oscar Wilde • Kazi Nazrul Islam Novels: Dragonlance, Harry Potter, Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy Fictional worlds: Discworld, James Bond, Middle-earth, Narnia, Oz, Fictional characters Performing arts Dance: Ballet Film: A Nightmare on Elm Street, Academy Award, Alien, Animation, Bollywood, Disney, Indiana Jones, Silent film, Star Wars Music: Music of Australia • Music of Canada  • Record production Styles: Alternative rock, Blues, Christian music, Classical guitar, Classical music, Country music, Electronic music, Eurovision, Guitar, Heavy metal (Christian metal), Hip hop, Indian classical music, Industrial music, Jazz, K-pop, Latin music, Marching band, Percussion, Piano, Pipe organ, Pop music, Progressive rock, Punk rock, Rock and Roll, Rock music, R&B and Soul Music Artists: AC/DC, AKB48, A. R. Rahman, Bryan Adams, Aerosmith, Christina Aguilera, Backstreet Boys, The Beach Boys, The Beatles, Justin Bieber, Björk, Brandy Norwood, Mariah Carey, Cher, Kelly Clarkson, The Clash, Miley Cyrus, Celine Dion, Dream Theater, Bob Dylan, Grateful Dead, Eminem, Fergie, Marvin Gaye, Girls Aloud, Green Day, Iron Maiden, The Jackson Family, Janet Jackson, Michael Jackson, The Kinks, Beyoncé, Lady Gaga, Avril Lavigne, Led Zeppelin, Linkin Park, Madonna, Miles Davis, Motörhead, Katy Perry, Pink Floyd, Powderfinger, Elvis Presley, Queen, Rihanna, The Rolling Stones, Sakis Rouvas, Rush, Santana, Britney Spears, The Supremes, Slipknot, Shania Twain, Shreya Ghoshal, U2, Usher, Rufus Wainwright, Neil Young, Frank Zappa, Shakira Opera: Gilbert & Sullivan Television: Australian television, BBC, The Big Bang Theory, Buffy the Vampire Slayer, Cartoon Network, Doctor Who, EastEnders, Ed, Edd n Eddy, Family Guy, Friends, Futurama, House, M.D., M*A*S*H, Millennium, Monty Python, Muppets, Nickelodeon, SpongeBob SquarePants, Star Trek, 24, The Simpsons, Sherlock Holmes Theatre: Musical theatre Visual arts: Portal:Anime and manga (Dragon Ball) • Architecture (Portal) • Cartoon • Computer graphics • Design • Graffiti • Origami • Photography • Studio Ghibli • Textile arts (Fashion, Knitting) • Typography Genre: Comedy • Furry • Horror fiction • King Arthur • Mythology • Pornography • Speculative fiction • Steampunk • Superhero fiction Recreation and Entertainment Food: Bacon Drink: Beer, Coffee, Liquor, Wine Sports: Asian Games · Association football (A-League, Football in Argentina, Association football variants, Football in Africa, Football in Germany, Football in India, English football, Soccer in the United States, Women's association football) • Athletics • Australian rules football • Badminton • Baseball • Basketball (College basketball, National Basketball Association) • Sport of Canada • Commonwealth Games • Cricket (Australian cricket team in England in 1948, Indian Premier League) • Cycling • Fencing • Figure skating • Fishing • Gridiron football (American football, Canadian football, College football, National Football League) • Golf • Gymnastics • Handball • Horse racing • Ice hockey • Martial arts (Karate) • Olympics • Paralympics • Professional wrestling • Racing (Motorsport: Formula One, NASCAR, Motorcycle racing) • Rock climbing • Rugby (Rugby league, Rugby union) • Sailing • Snooker • Tennis • Water sports (Swimming, Underwater diving)  • Women's sport Games: Amusement parks • Strategy games (Chess, Warhammer) • Role-playing games (Dungeons & Dragons) Video games: Final Fantasy • Halo • Mario • Massively multiplayer online games • Nintendo • PlayStation • Pokémon • Sega • SNK  • The Sims • Sonic the Hedgehog • Xbox • Zelda Hobbies, Crafts and Other: Gardening • Gemology and Jewelry • Home improvement • Numismatics • Philately • Radio • Scouting • Toys (Lego) edit  watch   Geography and places   (see in all page types) Geography (Atlas • Islands • Mountains) Africa Algeria • Angola • Benin • Botswana • Burkina Faso • Burundi • Cameroon • Cape Verde • Central African Republic • Chad • Côte d'Ivoire • Republic of the Congo • Democratic Republic of the Congo • Djibouti • Egypt • Eritrea • Ethiopia • Gabon • The Gambia • Ghana • Guinea • Guinea-Bissau • Kenya  (Mombasa, Nairobi) • Liberia • Libya • Madagascar • Malawi • Mali • Mauritania • Mauritius • Morocco • Mozambique • Namibia • Niger • Nigeria (Port Harcourt, Lagos)  • Rwanda • São Tomé and Príncipe • Senegal • Sierra Leone • Somalia • South Africa • South Sudan • Sudan • Tanzania • Togo • Tunisia • Uganda • Western Sahara • Zambia • Zimbabwe Antarctica • Arctic Asia Bhutan • Bangladesh • (Bengal, Chittagong, Dhaka) • Cambodia • China (Beijing, Hong Kong, Macau, Shanghai, Shenzhen, Tibet) • Taiwan • Himalaya region • India (Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal (Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Chandigarh, Chennai, Delhi, Hisar, Hyderabad, Kolkata, Kollam, Mumbai, Patna, Trichy, Udaipur, Jodhpur) • Indonesia • Japan (Osaka, Tokyo) • Kazakhstan • Korea (North Korea, South Korea, Seoul) • Kyrgyzstan • Malaysia • Mongolia • Nepal • Pakistan (Chitral, Karachi, Lahore, Jhelum, Islamabad, Sialkot) • Philippines (Bohol) • Punjab • SAARC • Singapore • Sri Lanka • Tajikistan • Thailand • Turkey • Vietnam Europe European Union Austria (Vienna, Tyrol) • Basque • Belgium (Brussels) • Bulgaria • Channel Islands • Corsica • Croatia • Czech Republic (Prague) • Denmark • Estonia • Finland • France (Paris, Lyon) • Germany (Baden-Württemberg • Bavaria • East Frisia • Hamburg • Lower Saxony • North Rhine-Westphalia • Saxony-Anhalt • Schleswig-Holstein) • Gibraltar • Greece (Macedonia) • Hungary (Budapest, Miskolc) • Ireland (Kilkenny) • Italy (Rome, Milan, Venice) • Latvia • Lithuania • Luxembourg • Malta • Netherlands • Poland • Portugal • Romania  (Bucharest) • Silesia • Slovakia • Slovenia • Spain (Galicia) • Sweden • United Kingdom (England (Bristol, Cornwall, Devon, Hertfordshire, Lincolnshire, London, Luton, Stamford, North West England (Cheshire, Cumbria, Greater Manchester, Merseyside, Yorkshire), Somerset, Wiltshire, South East England (East Sussex, Kent, Hampshire, Oxfordshire)) • Northern Ireland, Scotland, Wales) Albania (Tirana) • Andorra • Armenia • Azerbaijan • Belarus • Bosnia and Herzegovina • Catalan-speaking countries • Faroe Islands • Georgia • Iceland • Isle of Man • Kosovo • Republic of Macedonia • Moldova • Montenegro • Norway • Russia  (Chechnya, Moscow) • Serbia • Switzerland (Geneva) • Turkey • Ukraine (Crimea) • Vatican City Latin America and Caribbean Argentina (Buenos Aires • Rosario)  • Belize • Bermuda • Brazil • Bolivia • Chile (Pichilemu) • Colombia • Costa Rica • Cuba • Dominican Republic • Ecuador • El Salvador • Guatemala • Guyana • Haiti • Jamaica • Mexico • Nicaragua • Panama • Paraguay • Peru • Puerto Rico • Suriname • Trinidad and Tobago • Uruguay • Venezuela Places near you Middle East Afghanistan • Cyprus • Egypt • Iran (Tabaristan) • Iraq • Israel (Jerusalem) • Jordan • Kazakhstan • Kurdistan • Lebanon • Libya • Morocco • Oman • Palestine • Saudi Arabia • Syria • Tajikistan • Turkey • United Arab Emirates (Abu Dhabi) • Uzbekistan  North America Canada:  • Geography of Canada Alberta (Calgary, Edmonton) • British Columbia (Vancouver) • Manitoba • New Brunswick • Newfoundland and Labrador (St. John's) • Northwest Territories • Nova Scotia • Nunavut • Ontario (Eastern Ontario • Ottawa •Toronto • Hamilton) • Prince Edward Island  • Quebec (Montreal, Quebec City, Estrie, Laurentides, Saguenay–Lac-Saint-Jean) • Saskatchewan • Yukon Mexico  San Diego–Tijuana United States Alabama • Alaska • Arizona (Grand Canyon) • Arkansas • California (Greater Los Angeles • San Diego • San Diego–Tijuana, San Francisco Bay Area) • Colorado • Connecticut • Delaware • District of Columbia • Florida  (Jacksonville • Miami) • Georgia • Hawaii • Idaho • Illinois (Chicago) • Indiana (Indianapolis) • Iowa • Kansas • Kentucky (Louisville) • Louisiana (New Orleans) • Maine • Maryland • Massachusetts  (Boston) • Michigan (Detroit) • Minnesota • Mississippi • Missouri • Montana • Nebraska • Nevada (Las Vegas) • New England • New Hampshire • New Jersey • New Mexico • New York (New York City • Capital District • Finger Lakes • Hudson Valley • Syracuse) • North Carolina • North Dakota • Ohio (Cleveland) • Oklahoma • Oregon • Pennsylvania (Erie • Lancaster • Philadelphia • Pittsburgh) • Puerto Rico • Rhode Island • South Carolina • South Dakota • Tennessee • Texas (Austin • Dallas • Houston) • Utah • Vermont • Virginia • Washington (Seattle) • West Virginia • Wisconsin • Wyoming Oceania Australia Australian Capital Territory • New South Wales (City of Bankstown • Sydney) • Northern Territory • Queensland (Brisbane) • South Australia • Tasmania • Victoria (Melbourne) • Western Australia (Perth) Kiribati • Micronesia • New Zealand • Papua New Guinea • Tuvalu edit  watch   Health and fitness   (see in all page types) Health and fitness Medicine • Biology • Nursing • Dentistry • Food • Pharmacy and Pharmacology • Psychiatry • Pervasive developmental disorders • Complementary and Alternative Medicine • Sexuality • Viruses • Trauma & Orthopaedics • Sports edit  watch   History and events   (see in all page types) History American Old West • Ancient Egypt • Ancient Germanic Culture • Ancient Greece • Ancient Japan • Ancient Near East • Ancient Rome (Military of ancient Rome) • Anglo-Saxon England • Crown of Aragon • Archaeology • Ashura • Austria-Hungary • British Empire • Bulgarian Empire • Byzantine Empire • Classical Civilization • Colonialism • Disasters  • German Empire • Heraldry • History of Canada • History of the Latter Day Saint movement • History of Science • Indian independence movement • Khitan • Mesoamerica • Middle Ages • Nazi Germany • New France • Russian Empire • Sasanian Empire • Soviet Union  War:American Revolutionary War • American Civil War • Cold War • Italian Wars • Liberation War • Military history of France • Military history of Africa • Military history of the Ottoman Empire • Napoleonic Wars • September 11 attacks • Syrian civil war • World War I • World War II 1920s • 1930s • 1940s • 1950s • 1960s • 1970s • 1980s • 1990s • 2000s • 2010s Current events Sports Time Winter • Autumn Chronology edit  watch   Mathematics and logic   (see in all page types) Mathematics Algebra • Analysis • Category theory • Cryptography • Discrete mathematics • Geometry • Number theory • Topology Logic Set theory  Statistics  edit  watch   Natural and physical sciences   (see in all page types) Science History of Science • Philosophy of science • Systems science Biological science Agropedia • Amphibians and Reptiles • Animals • Arthropods • Astrobiology • Birds • Cats • Cetaceans • Crustaceans • Dinosaurs • Dogs • Ecology • Evolutionary biology • Extinct and Endangered Species • Fish • Forestry • Fungi • Gastropods • Horses • Insects  • Mammals • Marine life • Molecular Anthropology • Molecular and Cellular Biology (Metabolism, Gene wiki) • Neuroscience • Paleontology • Plants • Primates • Prehistoric mammals • Rabbits and hares • Sharks • Trees • Turtles • Viruses • Wildlife of Scotland • Wetlands Physical science Astronomy (Space, Solar System, Mars, Moon, Uranus, Jupiter, Star, X-ray astronomy)  Chemistry (Analytical chemistry, Organic chemistry, Physical chemistry, Crystallography)  Earth sciences (Atmospheric sciences, Earthquakes, Environment, Fire, Global warming, Tropical cyclones, Volcanoes and Volcanology, Weather, Water)  Physics (Cosmology, Gravitation, Electromagnetism) edit  watch   People and self   (see in all page types) Biography • Death • Human rights • Community • Gangs • Mind and brain • Thinking • Sexuality • LGBT • Serer • Transgender • Yoruba • Igbo edit  watch   Philosophy and thinking   (see in all page types) Philosophy Areas of philosophical inquiry Aesthetics • Epistemology • Ethics • Logic • Metaphysics • Mind and Brain (Thinking) • Philosophy of science • Social and political philosophy  Philosophies and ideologies Anarchism • Animal rights • Capitalism • Communism • Confucianism • Conservatism • Existentialism • Fascism • Liberalism • Libertarianism • Left-wing populism • Right-wing populism • Socialism • Taoism • Transhumanism edit  watch   Religion and belief systems   (see in all page types) Religion (Spirituality, Occult) Abrahamic religions Christianity Adventism • Anabaptism • Anglicanism • Arminianism • Baptist • Bible • Calvinism • Catholicism • Christadelphians • Christianity in China • Christianity in India • Eastern Christianity • Lutheranism • Methodism • Oriental Orthodoxy • Pope • Private revelation • Saints • Seventh-day Adventist Church Latter Day Saints Book of Mormon • LDS Church • Community of Christ Islam Shia Islam • Day Of Ashura • Ahmadiyyat • Qur'an • Islam in China • Sufism Judaism Kabbalah Creationism Non-Abrahamic religions Indian religions Ayyavazhi Buddhism Mahayana Buddhism • Tibetan Buddhism • Vajrayana Buddhism • Theravada Buddhism Gnosticism Hinduism Hindu Mythology  Jainism Digambara ?v?t?mbara Sikhism Religions and traditions with East Asian origin Chinese Folk Religion Confucianism • Shinto • Taoism • Falun Gong Religions with West Asian origin Zoroastrianism Bábism Bahá'í Faith New religions Scientology • Falun Gong  Theosophy Religions with European origin Heathenism Hellenismos Greek Mythology Wicca Traditional African religions African Serer Other Astrology • Mythology Non Religion or Belief Atheism • Nontheism edit  watch   Society and social sciences   (see in all page types) Social sciences Anthropology (Archaeology) • Economics • Education • Geography • History • Law • Linguistics • Psychology • Sociology Society Cooperatives • Disability • Discrimination • Economics and business  • Education (Schools, University, University of Cambridge, University of Oxford, University of Pittsburgh) • Environment • Ethnic groups: African American, Berbers, Celts, Hispanic and Latino Americans, Indigenous peoples of the Americas, Indigenous peoples of North America, Aboriginal Canadians •  Feminism • Folklore • Freedom of speech • Freemasonry • Gender studies • Genealogy • Globalization • Holidays • Hunger relief • Journalism • LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender) • (Transgender) • Men's rights • Social movements • Sustainable development • Terrorism • Transhumanism • Transnational child protection•Migrant Domestic Workers in Lebanon Law Criminal justice• Human rights • Law of England and Wales• Laws in India • Supreme Court of the United States Politics and Political science Anarchism • Animal rights • British politics • Capitalism • Communism • Canadian politics • Christian democracy • Conservatism • Fascism • Geert Wilders • India Government • Liberalism • Right-wing populism • International organizations: (United Nations  • NATO • SAARC) • Organized Labour • Pakistan Government • Philippine Presidency • Republican Party • U.S. Government (Barack Obama) • Donald Trump  • Social welfare and social work Military science Canadian Forces • Military of Greece • Military of Australia • Military of the United Kingdom (British Army • Royal Navy • Royal Air Force) • Military of the United States (United States Air Force • United States Army • United States Coast Guard • United States Marine Corps • United States Navy) • Tank • Half-track • War • Weapons of mass destruction edit  watch   Technology and applied sciences   (see in all page types) Technology Engineering • Agriculture and Agronomy  • Astronomy • Biotechnology • Bridges • Electronics (Telecommunication) • Mass surveillance • Energy (Renewable energy) • Forestry • Hazardous Materials • Infrastructure • Laser • Mining • Nanotechnology • Nuclear technology • Robotics Computing and Information technology Computer networking (Internet, IRC) • Computer programming (Python programming, Java) • Computer science (Artificial intelligence, Computer graphics) • Computer security (Cryptography) • Software (Free software, Linux) • Amiga  • Smartphone • Apple  • Google (Android) • Microsoft• Alphabet Transport Aviation • Bicycles/Cycling • Buses • Cars (Australian, Japanese) • Trucks • London Transport • Nautical (Lighthouses, UK Waterways) • Roads (Australian Roads, Canada Roads, U.S. Roads, California Roads, Maryland Roads, Michigan Highways, New York Roads, Washington Roads) • Spaceflight • Trains (North American railways, Railways in India, Sri Lanka Railways, UK Railways, Trams, UK Trams) Portals List Directory WikiProject Guidelines Instructions Categorizing (Portals category) Contents Overview Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Content listings Types Overviews Featured content Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories People deaths this year Timelines centuries decades Indices A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Wikipedia books What are portals? List of portals Shortcuts to this page: Portal:Categories • P:CAT Purge cache to show recent changes Shortcuts to this page: WP:PORT • P: Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Contents/Portals&oldid=746645444" Categories: Wikipedia navigation Content portals Portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Afrikaans Alemannisch ??????? Aragonés Arpetan ??????? ???? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Brezhoneg Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Frysk ??? ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Lëtzebuergesch Lumbaart Magyar ???? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? ????????? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Ripoarisch Român? ??????? Shqip Sicilianu ????? ???? Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ???? Vèneto Ti?ng Vi?t ?? Yorùbá ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 28 October 2016, at 17:20. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Stephen_Breyer_official_SCOTUS_portrait_crop.jpg |||File:Stephen Breyer official SCOTUS portrait crop.jpg From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this preview: 480 × 600 pixels. Other resolutions: 192 × 240 pixels | 384 × 480 pixels | 1,008 × 1,260 pixels. Original file ?(1,008 × 1,260 pixels, file size: 1.01 MB, MIME type: image/jpeg) This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary[edit] DescriptionStephen Breyer official SCOTUS portrait crop.jpg Official portrait of Supreme Court Justice Stephen Breyer. Date 2006 Source http://www.supremecourthistory.org/history/supremecourthistory_history_current_breyer.htm Author Steve Petteway, photographer for the US Supreme Court[1] Licensing[edit] Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work prepared by an officer or employee of the United States Government as part of that person’s official duties under the terms of Title 17, Chapter 1, Section 105 of the US Code. See Copyright. Note: This only applies to original works of the Federal Government and not to the work of any individual U.S. state, territory, commonwealth, county, municipality, or any other subdivision. This template also does not apply to postage stamp designs published by the United States Postal Service since 1978. (See § 313.6(C)(1) of Compendium of U.S. Copyright Office Practices). It also does not apply to certain US coins; see The US Mint Terms of Use. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law, including all related and neighboring rights. This file was reviewed on 29 September 2010 by the administrator or trusted user Jappalang (talk), who confirmed the Public Domain status on that date. Personality rightsPersonality rights warning Although this work is freely licensed or in the public domain, the person(s) shown may have rights that legally restrict certain re-uses unless those depicted consent to such uses. In these cases, a model release or other evidence of consent could protect you from infringement claims. Though not obliged to do so, the uploader may be able to help you to obtain such evidence. See our general disclaimer for more information. File history Click on a date/time to view the file as it appeared at that time. Date/Time Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 13:47, 10 August 2009 1,008 × 1,260 (1.01 MB) Gage {{Information |Description=Official portrait of Supreme Court Justice Stephen Breyer. |Source=http://www.supremecourthistory.org/02_history/subs_current/images_b/009.html |Date=2006 |Author=Collection of the Supreme Court of the United States, Photographe File usage More than 100 pages link to this file. The following list shows the first 100 page links to this file only. A full list is available. List of Jewish American politicians Supreme Court of the United States Talk:Main Page/Archive 34 User:4v4l0n42/Draft 6L User:4v4l0n42/Today User:Afterword User:Afterword/pretty User:AlMac User:Allard User:Bannus User:Brian/mainpage User:David Levy/Main2 User:David Levy/Test User:David Levy/Test2 User:Dbmag9/Main Page User:Drumguy8800/Main page draft User:ElAmericano/storage/mainpage1 User:Eloquence/Tour 01 User:Encephalon/Main User:FayssalF User:Getcrunk/Main Page Sandbox User:Go for it!/MP/nodiv User:Hemanshu/edmainpage User:Interiot/Main User:Jcrwiki~enwiki User:JonMoore/Main Page User:JustinWick/mydraft User:Kevin baas~enwiki/main page proposal User:Krik~enwiki/mp User:Krik~enwiki/nmp User:LEC20/Daily Diversions User:Lovelac7 User:Malomeat User:MarSch/Main body User:MarSch/Main page User:MattKingston User:Member/Wikipedia Front Page User:Mulad/portal User:Nickg331 User:NoSeptember/Main User:Node ue/MainPageTemplate2 User:Persian Poet Gal User:Porges/Main Page User:Quentin Smith/Shadow Main Page User:Ral315/Main Page User:RaptorX User:Siroxo/main page draft User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-22Jul User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-23Jul User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-24Jul User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-25Jul User:Somoza/Zero-Phonon User:Talrias/Main Page User:Tazmaniacs User:The bellman User:Thetorpedodog/xptablefree User:Tim Robinson/Main Page (Proposal) User:Tom-/Main Page CSS test User:Tom-/NS4 test User:Tom-/sandbox User:U-Two User:Vincent7 User:Zafiroblue05/Draft User talk:Guty~enwiki User talk:Kevin baas~enwiki/main page proposal Wikipedia:Main Page/French2 Wikipedia:Main Page/Temp10 Wikipedia:Main Page/Test Wikipedia:Main Page/test Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (Italian-style) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (Old PDA version) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (blue boy) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (editable) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (executive) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (misty breeze) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (regal) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (shades of blue) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (simple layout) Wikipedia:Today's featured article Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft/Draft 5 Archive Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft/Sj Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft/Test Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft2 Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft2 (fullsize text) Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft (Italian Inspired) Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft (current templates) Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft 0 Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft 6C Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft A Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft B Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft C Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft L Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft NOW Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft extra search box Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft extra search box2 Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft no search box Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/NOW Global file usage The following other wikis use this file: Usage on cs.wikipedia.org Nejvyšší soud Spojených stát? amerických Usage on de.wikipedia.org Liste der Richter am Obersten Gerichtshof der Vereinigten Staaten Usage on es.wikipedia.org Estados Unidos contra Lara Usage on fa.wikipedia.org ????? ??????????? ????? ???????? Usage on it.wikipedia.org Corte suprema degli Stati Uniti d'America Usage on ja.wikipedia.org ???????? Usage on ko.wikipedia.org ?? ?? ??? Usage on mr.wikipedia.org ????????? ???????? ???????? Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Suprema Corte dos Estados Unidos Usage on ru.wikipedia.org ????????? ??? ??? Usage on sh.wikipedia.org Vrhovni sud SAD Usage on sv.wikipedia.org USA:s högsta domstol Usage on tl.wikipedia.org Kataas-taasang Hukuman ng Estados Unidos Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Amerika Birle?ik Devletleri Yüksek Mahkemesi Usage on zh.wikipedia.org ?????? Metadata This file contains additional information, probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state, some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Orientation Normal Horizontal resolution 300 dpi Vertical resolution 300 dpi Software used Adobe Photoshop 7.0 File change date and time 08:52, 10 August 2009 Color space sRGB Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Stephen_Breyer_official_SCOTUS_portrait_crop.jpg" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces File Talk Variants Views Read View on Commons More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Upload file Special pages Page information Languages Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heffernan_v._City_of_Paterson |||Heffernan v. City of Paterson From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Heffernan v. City of Paterson Supreme Court of the United States Argued January 19, 2016 Decided April 26, 2016 Full case name Jeffrey Heffernan, Petitioner v. City of Paterson, et al. Docket nos. 14-1280 Citations 578 U.S. ___ (more) Opinion announcement Opinion announcement Prior history Jury finds in favor of the plaintiff, judge recuses for conflict of interest and case is retried; summary judgement in favor of the defense; Third Circuit reverses and remands; decision for the defense on remand; Third Circuit affirms Holding Police department's demotion of detective in response to mistaken belief he was supporting a challenger to the city's mayor in election violated his First Amendment rights regardless of his actual purpose. Judgement of the Third Circuit reversed and remanded. Court membership Chief Justice John G. Roberts Associate Justices Anthony Kennedy Clarence Thomas · Ruth Bader Ginsburg Stephen Breyer · Samuel Alito Sonia Sotomayor · Elena Kagan Case opinions Majority Breyer, joined by Roberts, Kennedy, Ginsburg, Sotomayor, Kagan Dissent Thomas, joined by Alito Laws applied U.S. Const. amend. I 42 U.S.C. § 1983 Heffernan v. City of Paterson, No. 14-1280, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in 2016 concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees. By a 6–2 margin, the Court held that a public employee's constitutional rights might be violated when an employer, believing that the employee was engaging in what would be protected speech, disciplines them because of that belief, even if the employee did not exercise such a constitutional right. The case was brought after Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey police force, went to a distribution center and picked up a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor in the 2005 election (Heffernan's mother had wanted a sign, so he was getting one for her). While Heffernan did not support the challenger, after other officers saw him with the sign they told senior officers, including the police chief, who strongly supported the mayor. For his apparent public support of the other candidate, they demoted Heffernan to beat patrol work as a uniformed officer. Heffernan brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his First Amendment rights. The case took a decade to reach the Supreme Court. For most of that time it was in federal district court, where it was heard by three different judges. A jury verdict in Heffernan's favor was set aside. A later summary judgment in the city's favor was overturned on appeal before being granted again in the third trial.[1] Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer stated that the department's belief was all that mattered, since the Court's precedent in this area holds it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee (who does not work under a contract that explicitly permits such discipline) for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion in which he was joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed, but his constitutional rights had not been violated. Contents 1 Legal background 2 Prior history 2.1 Original dispute 2.2 District court 2.3 Court of Appeals 2.4 Supreme Court 2.4.1 Oral arguments 3 Opinion of the Court 3.1 Dissent 4 Commentary 5 Aftermath 6 See also 7 References Legal background[edit] The First Amendment guarantees the rights of freedom of speech and peaceable assembly, among others. While not explicitly mentioned, the Supreme Court has held that the right to assembly includes the freedom of association, particularly political association.[2] These protections not only prohibit the government from passing laws which infringe upon these rights, but also from taking actions which would violate them. While the Bill of Rights—which includes the First Amendment—applied originally only to the federal government, the ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment allowed for the application of the Bill of Rights to the states under the incorporation doctrine.[3] In order to better protect these rights in the Reconstruction Era, Congress passed the Second Enforcement Act of 1871 at the request of President Ulysses S. Grant to better counter white supremacist organizations such as the Ku Klux Klan that were intimidating and suppressing voting by black citizens.[4] The act provided a remedy for those citizens who were deprived of their constitutional rights under the "color of any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage, of any State or Territory or the District of Columbia" and is currently codified at 42 U.S.C. § 1983.[5] With its decision in Monroe v. Pape (1961), the Court expanded the reach of section 1983 such that it is now used as a method of checking abuse by state officials who infringe upon constitutionally protected rights.[6][7] The First Amendment protects public employees from retaliation by their employer when speaking on matters of public concern.[8] In Pickering v. Board of Education (1968), the Court first articulated the right of public employees to be protected from dismissal for exercising their right to free speech. There, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of a teacher who was fired after writing a letter to a local newspaper critical of its handling of a recent bond issue.[9] Eight years later, this protection from dismissal was extended to cover partisan political ideology and affiliation in Elrod v. Burns.[8] But the Court has recognized that the "government as employer" has wider constitutional latitude in its decisions than the "government as sovereign".[10] In order to adequately delineate the limits of the government-as-employer's discretion, the Court developed a framework in Connick v. Myers (1983) known as the Connick test. It consists of elements. The first is the threshold a plaintiff must pass to state a claim: the plaintiff must show that they were speaking on a matter of public concern. The second falls to the employer: they must show that the harm to workplace efficiency outweighs the harm caused by infringing upon the right to free speech.[11] In Waters v. Churchill (1994), the Court was faced with two differing accounts of the speech at issue. The question presented to the Court was whether the Connick test ought be applied to what the employer thought was said or what was actually said. The case revolved around a nurse dismissed for a conversation she had with a coworker. There was a discrepancy between what she argued was said and what her employer thought was said. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, joined by a plurality of justices, opined that the Connick test must be applied to the speech the employer thought occurred, and on which it acted, rather than that which the finder of fact determines did occur.[12] Prior history[edit] Original dispute[edit] Downtown Paterson In 2005, Jeffrey Heffernan was a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey police. His supervisor and the chief of police were both appointed by the city's incumbent mayor, Jose Torres, who was being challenged by city councilman Lawrence Spagnola in that year's election. Heffernan was friendly with Spagnola, a former police chief,[1] and informally supported his campaign. He could not vote in the election as he did not live in the city.[13] At the request of his sick mother, who did live in the city, Heffernan while off-duty picked up a Spagnola lawn sign for her after her previous sign was stolen. Other officers saw him at the distribution location holding a sign and talking to Spagnola campaign staff. They soon notified superiors, and the next day officials demoted Heffernan from detective to patrol officer for his perceived "overt involvement" with the Spagnola campaign.[14] District court[edit] Heffernan sued the city, the mayor, and his superior officers under 42 U.S.C. §1983 in the federal District Court for New Jersey, claiming that his rights of freedom of speech as well as freedom of association had been violated.[15] Heffernan contended that while he had not actually engaged in any protected speech, the department acted on the belief that he had, and the department should not have demoted him on the basis of that erroneous belief.[14] In 2009, a jury found for Heffernan and awarded him damages from the police officials and the city. Despite the verdict, Heffernan sought a retrial because Judge Peter G. Sheridan had not allowed him to pursue the freedom of speech claim; the defense did so as well because Judge Sheridan had allowed the freedom of association claim. While considering these motions, Judge Sheridan became aware of a conflict of interest through a former law firm and set aside the verdict, setting a new date for trial before Judge Dennis M. Cavanaugh.[16] Judge Cavanaugh granted summary judgment to the defendants on the freedom of speech claim based on their earlier motions, holding that Heffernan had not engaged in protected speech so his rights could not have been violated. In 2012, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals reversed Judge Cavanaugh's ruling and remanded the case to him with instructions that he was to allow Heffernan to present his freedom of association claim and consider the facts from the jury trial when reconsidering the summary-judgment motions.[16] Judge Kevin McNulty heard the case on remand. After considering the parties' motions for summary judgment again, he ruled in the city's favor in 2014. Heffernan, he ruled, had not engaged in any protected speech or expressive conduct. Judge McNulty also ruled that Heffernan could not prevail on claims that his perceived speech was protected, per Ambrose v. Robinson Township, a previous case on that issue in the Third Circuit,[17] or that his actions were protected since they aided and abetted speech.[18] Judge McNulty also rejected similar claims for freedom of association. He decided that Dye v. Office of the Racing Commission, a case in which the Sixth Circuit had held that the First Amendment reached perceived political association,[19] was not a precedent he could rely on since Dye itself explicitly rejected Ambrose, and as a district judge he could not reject circuit precedent.[20] Court of Appeals[edit] On appeal to the Third Circuit, a three-judge panel of Judge Robert Cowen, Judge Morton Ira Greenberg and Judge Thomas I. Vanaskie unanimously held for the city.[1] In a decision issued in 2015, Judge Vanaskie, writing for the Court, reiterated Judge McNulty's finding that Heffernan's actions in picking up the sign for his mother did not constitute protected speech or association. He distinguished the case at hand from the Sixth Circuit's ruling in Dye by noting that in that case, the employers had inferred the employees' intent from their non-participation in partisan politics rather than an actual action they had taken, as had occurred in Heffernan's case.[1] Judge Vanaskie instead found guidance from the Supreme Court's 1994 holding in Waters v. Churchill, in which it had upheld an Illinois public hospital's dismissal of a nurse for her comments about a supervisor to a colleague, despite an ongoing factual dispute about the substance of those comments. The Court found that the hospital administration had made a reasonable attempt to investigate what the nurse had said before firing her. In that case, the Court had said explicitly that disciplining employees for things they did not actually do did not rise to the level of a constitutional violation.[1] Supreme Court[edit] Following the Third Circuit's decision, Heffernan petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari, requesting they hear the case. After the Court considered both Heffernan's petition and the city's reply, it granted the petition on the first day of the 2015 term. Both parties consented to the filing of amicus curiae briefs by uninvolved parties who believed they had a stake in the outcome of the case. The National Association of Government Employees, Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, and Thomas Jefferson Center for the Protection of Free Expression filed amicus briefs in support of Heffernan, while the New Jersey State League of Municipalities and the National Conference of State Legislatures filed briefs in support of the City of Paterson.[21] The United States government also filed an amicus brief in support of Heffernan, as well as a motion to appear at oral argument, which the Court granted, meaning the Solicitor General's office would be appearing at oral arguments, held on January 19, 2016.[22] Oral arguments[edit] External video Heffernan v. City of Paterson Oral Argument, C-SPAN[23] Mark Frost, arguing for petitioner Jeffrey Heffernan, was immediately met with questions from the justices: Anthony Kennedy asked for clarification on the particular right to be protected, and Antonin Scalia, Samuel Alito and Chief Justice John Roberts all questioned him about whether his rights could be infringed if he was not actually engaged in any speech.[24] Justice Scalia (who died before the decision was announced) argued that there was "no constitutional right not to be fired for the wrong reason."[25] Frost responded that the motives of the government, rather than the actions of the individual, were important in this case. Assistant to the Solicitor General Ginger Anders, arguing on behalf of the United States as amicus curiae in favor of Heffernan, continued this argument, stating that there is "a First Amendment right not to have adverse action taken against him by his employer for the unconstitutional purpose of suppressing disfavored political beliefs."[25] Arguing for respondents, Thomas Goldstein distinguished between political neutrality and political apathy. He argued that the First Amendment protects political neutrality, the conscious choice to not take a position, but does not protect political apathy, when a person simply does not care and makes no particular choice to be neutral.[24] As Heffernan claimed that he had no affiliation with Spagnola, the respondents argued that Heffernan's actions constitute unprotected apathy rather than a conscious choice of neutrality.[26] Justice Elena Kagan questioned Goldstein as to the purpose of the First Amendment saying, "the idea has to do with why the government acted" to which he responded, "It's called an individual right, not a government wrong."[25] Frost took a rebuttal to respond to Goldstein's distinction between political neutrality and apathy, arguing that there is little distinction as the government is acting for impermissible reasons in both cases.[24] Opinion of the Court[edit] Justice Stephen Breyer delivered the opinion of the Court. In a 6–2 decision authored by Justice Stephen Breyer, the Court reversed the ruling of the lower court and ruled that the employer's motive is material to First Amendment challenges. Citing Waters v. Churchill, Justice Breyer wrote, [W]e conclude that, as in Waters, the government's reason for demoting Heffernan is what counts here. When an employer demotes an employee out of a desire to prevent the employee from engaging in political activity that the First Amendment protects, the employee is entitled to challenge that unlawful action under the First Amendment ... —even if, as here, the employer makes a factual mistake about the employee's behavior.[27] The Court remanded the case to the Third Circuit and made clear in its opinion that, while it is impermissible to retaliate based upon perceived protected speech, the lower courts should take into consideration whether Heffernan was disciplined for violating any different and neutral policies.[28] The majority provided three main arguments in support of its reasoning: that their interpretation is more in line with the text of the First Amendment, that it better served the First Amendment's purpose of limiting political patronage, and that such an interpretation will not significantly burden employers.[29] Justice Breyer argued that unlike the Fourteenth Amendment, which focuses on the rights of the people, the First Amendment focuses on the actions of the government when it says, "Congress shall make no law ... abridging the freedom of speech."[30] As the text of the amendment focuses on the government's abilities to make laws, it is the government's actions and motives, not the actual actions of citizens, which are proscribed by the Amendment. While the policy at issue was not a law of Congress, the actions were still that of a government official that infringed upon rights guaranteed by the First Amendment.[27] The Court supported this interpretation by recognizing that the First Amendment sought to prevent government actions from discouraging protected activity.[31] Citing Branti v. Finkel, the Court pointed out that precedent never required plaintiffs in political affiliation cases to show change in allegiance to be successful, and similarly extended that logic to this case: the potential chilling effect on constitutionally protected speech still exists, regardless of the factual basis of the employer's reasoning.[32] Because employees thinking of engaging in protected activity will be equally dissuaded by an incorrect dismissal as by a correct dismissal, both reasonings should be considered in violation of the First Amendment.[33] Respondents argued that finding employers liable for factual mistakes would place substantial costs upon employers.[33] The Court rejected this argument, saying that an employee would still need to prove the employer acted out of an improper motive. Referring to Heffernan's case and those like it, the Court said that "the employee will, if anything, find it more difficult to prove that motive, for the employee will have to point to more than his own conduct to show an employer's intent".[33] Dissent[edit] Justice Thomas authored the dissent. Justice Clarence Thomas authored the dissent, in which Justice Samuel Alito joined. Justice Thomas argued that the previous ruling should have been upheld "because federal law does not provide a cause of action to plaintiffs whose constitutional rights have not been violated".[34] The dissent focused on the text of the statute Heffernan was suing under: 42 U.S.C. § 1983. The statute provides a cause of action only for those whose rights have actually been violated by the government. Because Heffernan maintained that he had not been exercising his First Amendment rights, the dissent argued that those rights could not have been violated, and that a section 1983 claim requires that the employee engage in protected activity and that the employer retaliate against that activity.[35] The dissent argued that, for a section 1983 claim to be valid, "harm alone is not enough; it has to be the right kind of harm."[36] Thomas provided an example of a law allowing police to pull over any driver without cause. This would obviously violate the Fourth Amendment rights of anyone stopped, but people stuck in traffic who were injured by the collateral damage of unconstitutional actions would not be able to sue because none of their rights was violated. Similarly, it is not enough for Heffernan to have shown injury but violation of an actual right as well. For the dissent, even if the dismissal was for the wrong reason and harm was suffered, the dismissal cannot infringe upon rights he never exercised.[37] Further supporting their argument, the dissent cited Monterey v. Del Monte Dunes at Monterey, Ltd. to argue that a Section 1983 claim falls under tort law, in order to draw a distinction between how attempts are handled under tort and criminal law. Under criminal law, a factually impossible attempt to commit a crime, such as trying to steal from an empty pocket or defraud someone with no money, can still be tried as an attempt. No such doctrine exists in tort law. Because Heffernan was not engaged in protected activity, the police department could only have attempted to deprive him of his right, so his suit must fail because "there are no attempted torts."[38] Commentary[edit] The day after oral arguments, writer Gilad Edelman criticized the Court's assumption that Heffernan never exercised his First Amendment rights, saying, "the Supreme Court may miss an opportunity to make sure that cases like his really are rare."[39] Edelman interpreted Heffernan's actions as being well within the existing First Amendment precedent. Though Heffernan was not necessarily supporting the candidate, he was talking and associating with people connected to the candidate, actions already protected under existing precedent. Edelman suggested that, regardless of whether or not Heffernan intended to be identified as supporting the campaign, he was still punished by the city for associating.[39] Soon after the ruling was announced, the decision was largely praised. Jonathan Stahl, a writer at the Constitution Daily, said that "[t]he potential impact of this case on our understanding of the First Amendment is notable."[40] Similarly, The Economist called it "good law" and a "significant development" for expanding the existing jurisprudence to perceived speech, not just actual speech.[41] Aftermath[edit] Subsequent to the Supreme Court's ruling, the City of Paterson approved a $1.6 million settlement payout to Heffernan. The final payment of the settlement is due on September 30, 2017.[42] See also[edit] Freedom of speech portal New Jersey portal Supreme Court of the United States portal US labor law Spoils system 2015 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 578 References[edit] ^ a b c d e Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 777 F.3d 147, 149 (3rd Cir., 2015). Hereafter distinguished as Heffernan III. ^ NAACP v. Alabama, 357 U.S. 499 (1958). ^ Incorporation Doctrine, Cornell University Law School, (last visited June 20, 2016). ^ Allen Trelease, White Terror: The Ku Klux Klan Conspiracy and Southern Reconstruction 387-388 (1971). ^ 42 U.S.C. § 1983. ^ Karen M. Blum & Kathryn R. Urbonya, Section 1983 Litigation (1998) ^ Monroe v. Pape, 365 U.S. 167 (1961). ^ a b Elrod v. Burns, 427 U.S. 347 (1976). ^ Pickering v. Board of Education, 391 U.S. 563 (1968). ^ Waters v. Churchill, 511 U.S. 661, 671 (1994). ^ David Hudson, Balancing Act: Public Employees and Free Speech, 3 First Reports 23 (2002). ^ Waters v. Churchill, at 679–681. ^ Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 2 F.Supp.3d 563, 566 (D.N.J., 2014). Hereafter distinguished as Heffernan II. ^ a b Heffernan v. City of Paterson, No. 14-1280, 578 U.S. ___, slip op. at 2 (2016). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 2–3. ^ a b Heffernan II, at 568 (citing the earlier 2012 decision). ^ Ambrose v. Robinson Township, 303 F. 3d 488 (3rd Cir., 2002). ^ Heffernan II, 570–76. ^ Dye v. Office of the Racing Commission, 702 F.3d 286 (6th Cir. 2012). ^ Heffernan II, 579–581. ^ Amicus curiae briefs in support of petitioners: Brief for the National Association of Government Employees as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Nov. 16, 2015). Brief for the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Nov. 23, 2015). Brief for the Thomas Jefferson Center for the Protection of Free Expression, et al. as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Nov. 23, 2015). Amicus briefs in support of respondents: Brief for the New Jersey State League of Municipalities as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Dec. 23, 2015). Brief for the National Conference of State Legislatures, et al. as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Dec. 23, 2015). ^ No. 14-1280, United States Supreme Court (Apr. 29, 2016). ^ "Heffernan v. City of Paterson Oral Argument". C-SPAN. January 19, 2016. Retrieved April 19, 2017.  ^ a b c Howard Wasserman, Argument analysis: The First Amendment, political inactivity, and improper government motive, SCOTUSblog (Jan. 20, 2016). ^ a b c Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 578 U.S. ___ (2016) (Oral Arguments). ^ Transcript of Oral Argument at 31, Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 578 US ___ (2016) ^ a b Heffernan, slip op. at 6. ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 8. ^ Howard Wasserman, Opinion analysis: Improper motive can violate the First Amendment, even with a factual mistake, SCOTUSblog (Apr. 26, 2016). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6 (citing U.S. Const. amend. I) (internal quotations omitted). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6–7 ("The constitutional harm at issue in the ordinary [free speech] case consists in large part of discouraging employees—both the employee discharged (or demoted) and his or her colleagues—from engaging in protected activities."). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6–7 (citing Branti v. Finkel, 445 U.S. 507, 517). ^ a b c Heffernan, slip op. at 7. ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 1 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 2–4 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 5 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 4 (Thomas, J., dissenting) citing United States v. Stefonek, 179 F. 3d (7th Cir. 1999). . ^ a b Gilad Edelman, Heffernan v. Paterson and an Absurd First Amendment Doctrine, The New Yorker (Jan. 20, 2016). ^ Jonathan Stahl, Supreme Court rules on political speech and the First Amendment, National Constitution Center (Apr. 29, 2016). ^ S. M., Why freedom of speech might protect you when you aren't speaking, The Economist (Apr. 29, 2016). ^ Malinconico, Joe (October 19, 2016). "In a reversal, Paterson council OKs $1.6M settlement lawsuit that went to U.S. Supreme Court". North Jersey.com. Retrieved April 25, 2017.  v t e United States First Amendment case law Establishment Clause Public funding Everson v. Board of Education (1947) McCollum v. Board of Education (1948) Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York (1970) Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971) Tilton v. Richardson (1971) Committee for Public Education & Religious Liberty v. Nyquist (1973) Sloan v. Lemon (1973) Wolman v. Walter (1977) Marsh v. Chambers (1983) Mueller v. Allen (1983) Aguilar v. Felton (1985) Board of Education of Kiryas Joel Village School District v. Grumet (1994) Agostini v. Felton (1997) Mitchell v. Helms (2000) Zelman v. Simmons-Harris (2002) Locke v. Davey (2004) Arizona Christian School Tuition Organization v. Winn (2011) Public displays Stone v. Graham (1980) Lynch v. Donnelly (1984) Board of Trustees of Scarsdale v. McCreary (1985) County of Allegheny v. ACLU (1989) McCreary County v. ACLU of Kentucky (2005) Van Orden v. Perry (2005) Pleasant Grove City v. Summum (2009) School prayer Zorach v. Clauson (1952) Engel v. Vitale (1962) Abington School District v. Schempp (1963) Stone v. Graham (1980) Wallace v. Jaffree (1985) Lee v. Weisman (1992) Santa Fe Independent School District v. Doe (2000) Elk Grove Unified School District v. Newdow (2004) Creationism Epperson v. Arkansas (1968) Edwards v. Aguillard (1987) Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District (M.D. Pa. 2005) Legislature prayer Marsh v. Chambers (1983) Town of Greece v. Galloway (2014) Establishment Clause, Other McGowan v. Maryland (1961) Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York (1970) McDaniel v. Paty (1978) Widmar v. Vincent (1981) Larkin v. Grendel's Den, Inc. (1982) Estate of Thornton v. Caldor, Inc. (1985) Texas Monthly, Inc. v. Bullock (1989) Free Exercise Clause Vidal v. Girard's Executors (1844) Reynolds v. United States (1879) Davis v. Beason (1890) Schneider v. New Jersey (1939) Cantwell v. Connecticut (1940) Minersville School District v. Gobitis (1940) Murdock v. Pennsylvania (1943) United State v. Ballard (1944) Braunfeld v. Brown (1961) Torcaso v. Watkins (1961) Sherbert v. Verner (1963) Presbyterian Church v. Hull Church (1969) Wisconsin v. Yoder (1972) NLRB v. Catholic Bishop of Chicago (1979) Harris v. McRae (1980) Thomas v. Review Board of the Indiana Employment Security Division (1981) United States v. Lee (1982) Bob Jones University v. United States (1983) Bowen v. Roy (1986) Goldman v. Weinberger (1986) Employment Division v. Smith (1990) Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah (1993) City of Boerne v. Flores (1997) Watchtower Society v. Village of Stratton (2002) Cutter v. Wilkinson (2005) Gonzales v. UDV (2006) Freedom of speech (portal) Sedition and imminent danger Alien and Sedition Acts (1798) Masses Publishing Co. v. Patten (S.D.N.Y. 1917) Schenck v. United States (1919) Abrams v. United States (1919) Gitlow v. New York (1925) Whitney v. California (1927) Dennis v. United States (1951) Communist Party v. Subversive Activities Control Board (1955, 1961) Yates v. United States (1957) Bond v. Floyd (1966) Brandenburg v. Ohio (1969) False speech Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc. (1974) United States v. Alvarez (2012) Fighting words and the heckler's veto Cantwell v. Connecticut (1940) Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire (1942) Terminiello v. Chicago (1949) Feiner v. New York (1951) Gregory v. Chicago (1969) National Socialist Party of America v. Village of Skokie (1977) R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul (1992) Snyder v. Phelps (2011) Elonis v. United States (2015) Freedom of assembly and public forums Hague v. CIO (1939) Schneider v. New Jersey (1939) Martin v. Struthers (1943) Marsh v. Alabama (1946) Niemotko v. Maryland (1951) Edwards v. South Carolina (1963) Cox v. Louisiana (1965) Brown v. Louisiana (1966) Adderley v. Florida (1966) Carroll v. Town of Princess Anne (1968) Coates v. Cincinnati (1971) Organization for a Better Austin v. Keefe (1971) Lloyd Corp. v. Tanner (1972) Pruneyard Shopping Center v. Robins (1980) Widmar v. Vincent (1981) Hill v. Colorado (2000) McCullen v. Coakley (2014) Symbolic speech Stromberg v. California (1931) United States v. O'Brien (1968) Cohen v. California (1971) Smith v. Goguen (1974) Texas v. Johnson (1989) United States v. Eichman (1990) Virginia v. Black (2003) Compelled speech Minersville School District v. Gobitis (1940) West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette (1943) Wooley v. Maynard (1977) Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System v. Southworth (2000) Davenport v. Washington Education Association (2007) Knox v. Service Employees International Union, Local 1000 (2012) Agency for International Development v. Alliance for Open Society International, Inc. (2013) Loyalty oaths American Communications Association v. Douds (1950) Garner v. Board of Public Works (1951) Speiser v. Randall (1958) Keyishian v. Board of Regents (1965) Communist Party of Indiana v. Whitcomb (1974) School speech Minersville School District v. Gobitis (1940) West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette (1943) Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District (1969) Island Trees School District v. Pico (1982) Bethel School District v. Fraser (1986) Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier (1988) Rosenberger v. University of Virginia (1995) Morse v. Frederick (2007) Obscenity Rosen v. United States (1896) United States v. One Book Called Ulysses (S.D.N.Y. 1933) Roth v. United States (1957) One, Inc. v. Olesen (1958) Marcus v. Search Warrant (1961) MANual Enterprises v. Day (1962) Jacobellis v. Ohio (1964) Quantity of Books v. Kansas (1964) Freedman v. Maryland (1965) Memoirs v. Massachusetts (1966) Redrup v. New York (1967) Ginsberg v. New York (1968) Stanley v. Georgia (1969) Cohen v. California (1971) United States v. Thirty-seven Photographs (1971) Kois v. Wisconsin (1972) Miller v. California (1973) Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton (1973) United States v. 12 200-ft. Reels of Film (1973) Jenkins v. Georgia (1974) Erznoznik v. City of Jacksonville (1975) Young v. American Mini Theatres (1976) New York v. Ferber (1982) American Booksellers v. Hudnut (7th Cir., 1985) Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc. (1986) Osborne v. Ohio (1990) United States v. X-Citement Video (1994) Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union (1997) United States v. Playboy Entertainment Group (2000) Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition (2002) Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union (2002) Nitke v. Gonzales (S.D.N.Y., 2005) United States v. Williams (2008) FCC v. Fox Televisions Stations - 2 cases (2009 and 2012) American Booksellers Foundation for Free Expression v. Strickland (6th Cir., 2009) United States v. Kilbride (9th Cir., 2009) United States v. Stevens (2010) Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association (2011) Public employees Pickering v. Board of Education (1968) Perry v. Sindermann (1972) Board of Regents of State Colleges v. Roth (1972) Mt. Healthy City School District Board of Education v. Doyle (1977) Givhan v. Western Line Consolidated School District (1979) Connick v. Myers (1983) Rankin v. McPherson (1987) Waters v. Churchill (1994) Garcetti v. Ceballos (2006) Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri (2011) Heffernan v. City of Paterson (2016) Hatch Act and similar laws Ex parte Curtis (1882) United Public Workers v. Mitchell (1947) United States Civil Service Commission v. National Association of Letter Carriers (1973) Broadrick v. Oklahoma (1973) Licensing and restriction of speech Mutual Film Corporation v. Industrial Commission of Ohio (1915) Joseph Burstyn, Inc. v. Wilson (1952) Freedman v. Maryland (1965) Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council (1976) Hoffman Estates v. The Flipside, Hoffman Estates, Inc. (1982) Walker v. Texas Division, Sons of Confederate Veterans (2015) Commercial speech Valentine v. Chrestensen (1942) Rowan v. U.S. Post Office Dept. (1970) Pittsburgh Press Co. v. Pittsburgh Commission on Human Relations (1973) Bigelow v. Commonwealth of Virginia (1974) Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council (1976) Bates v. State Bar of Arizona (1977) Linmark Associates, Inc. v. Willingboro (1977) Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Ass’n (1978) Friedman v. Rogers (1979) Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission (1980) Consol. Edison Co. v. Public Serv. Comm'n (1980) Bolger v. Youngs Drug Products (1983) Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel (1985) Pacific Gas & Electric Co. v. Public Utilities Commission of California (1986) Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto Rico (1986) San Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic Committee (1987) 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island (1996) Sorrell v. IMS Health Inc. (2011) Campaign finance and political speech Buckley v. Valeo (1976) First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti (1978) Citizens Against Rent Control v. City of Berkeley (1981) California Medical Association v. FEC (1981) Brown v. Socialist Workers '74 Campaign Committee (1982) Regan v. Taxation with Representation of Washington (1983) FEC v. National Conservative Political Action Committee (1985) FEC v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life (1986) Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce (1990) McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Commission (1995) Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Committee v. FEC (1996) Nixon v. Shrink Missouri Government PAC (2000) FEC v. Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Committee (2001) Republican Party of Minnesota v. White (2002) McConnell v. FEC (2003) FEC v. Beaumont (2003) Randall v. Sorrell (2006) FEC v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc. (2007) Davis v. FEC (2008) Citizens United v. FEC (2010) McComish v. Bennett (2011) American Tradition Partnership v. Bullock (2012) McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission (2014) Williams-Yulee v. The Florida Bar (2015) Freedom of the press Prior restraints and censorship Near v. Minnesota (1931) Lovell v. City of Griffin (1938) Hannegan v. Esquire (1946) New York Times Co. v. United States (1971) Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo (1974) Nebraska Press Assn. v. Stuart (1976) Tory v. Cochran (2005) Privacy Time, Inc. v. Hill (1967) Cox Broadcasting Corp. v. Cohn (1975) Florida Star v. B. J. F. (1989) Taxation and privileges Grosjean v. American Press Co. (1936) Branzburg v. Hayes (1972) Minneapolis Star Tribune Company v. Commissioner (1983) Defamation Beauharnais v. Illinois (1952) New York Times Co. v. Sullivan (1964) Curtis Publishing Co. v. Butts (1967) Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc. (1974) Time, Inc. v. Firestone (1976) Bose Corp. v. Consumers Union of United States, Inc. (1984) Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc. (1985) McDonald v. Smith (1985) Hustler Magazine v. Falwell (1988) Harte-Hanks Communications v. Connaughton (1989) Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co. (1990) Obsidian Finance Group, LLC v. Cox (9th Cir., 2014) Broadcast media Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC (1969) FCC v. Pacifica Foundation (1978) Turner Broadcasting v. FCC (1994) Bartnicki v. Vopper (2001) Freedom of association Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee v. McGrath (1951) Watkins v. United States (1957) NAACP v. Alabama (1958) Baggett v. Bullitt (1964) In re Primus (1978) Roberts v. United States Jaycees (1984) Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, & Bisexual Group of Boston (1995) Boy Scouts of America v. Dale (2000) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Heffernan_v._City_of_Paterson&oldid=777385770" Categories: United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court United States First Amendment case law United States public employment case law 2016 in United States case law Hidden categories: Featured articles Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Add links This page was last modified on 26 April 2017, at 21:31. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page |||Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 5,393,689 articles in English Arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From today's featured article Stephen Breyer Heffernan v. City of Paterson was a U.S. Supreme Court case concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees, decided on April 26, 2016. Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey, police force, was seen with a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor. Heffernan's supervisors mistakenly thought that he was actively supporting the challenger and demoted him. He brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his right to free speech. Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer (pictured) cited the Court's precedents, which had held that it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not actually engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed but not that his constitutional rights had been violated. (Full article...) Recently featured: George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore "The Shape of Things to Come" (Lost) Shakespeare authorship question Archive By email More featured articles... Did you know... Unita Blackwell ... that civil rights activist Unita Blackwell (pictured) was the first African-American woman to be elected mayor in the state of Mississippi? ... that soldiers lined up on the sinking British troopship SS Tyndareus began to sing "It's a Long Way to Tipperary" while waiting for orders? ... that many reviewers compared the superhero comic Ultra to the television series Sex and the City? ... that the recently named fossil egg Suchoolithus dates to the Late Jurassic, making it tied for the oldest-known crocodylomorph egg? ... that the film The Brainwashing of My Dad received funding from Kickstarter? ... that the term elastance, the inverse of capacitance, was coined by Oliver Heaviside to promote an analogy of a capacitor as a spring rather than a container of charge? ... that "Christ ist erstanden", an old German hymn mentioned as early as the 12th century, was set for choir in the 21st century? ... that despite topping his class at Sandhurst, John Gellibrand found the prospects for promotion in the British Army so bleak that he resigned his commission and moved to Tasmania to grow apples? Recent additions Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru In the London Marathon, Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru (pictured) win the women's and men's races, respectively. A Taliban attack on an Afghan National Army base kills 140 soldiers. Turkey votes in a constitutional referendum in favour of replacing its parliamentary system of government with an executive presidency. A suicide bombing of civilian evacuation buses near Aleppo, Syria, kills more than 120 people, including at least 80 children. Emma Morano, the last known living person born before 1900, dies at the age of 117. Ongoing: Battle of Mosul Recent deaths: Erin Moran Michele Scarponi Ugo Ehiogu Aaron Hernandez On this day... April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries Today's featured picture The Storm is a painting by French artist Pierre Auguste Cot completed in 1880. Currently on display at New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art, it was commissioned by Catharine Lorillard Wolfe. Suggested inspirations have included the Greek romance Daphnis and Chloe by Longus as well as the romantic tale Paul et Virginie by Bernardin de Saint-Pierre. Painting: Pierre Auguste Cot Recently featured: Charolais bull Jesse B. Jackson Dynjandi Archive More featured pictures... Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning materials and activities Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 5,393,689 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=762066868" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Main Page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Languages ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Galego ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Român? ??????? Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? This page was last modified on 26 January 2017, at 12:39. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page#mw-head |||Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 5,393,689 articles in English Arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From today's featured article Stephen Breyer Heffernan v. City of Paterson was a U.S. Supreme Court case concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees, decided on April 26, 2016. Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey, police force, was seen with a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor. Heffernan's supervisors mistakenly thought that he was actively supporting the challenger and demoted him. He brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his right to free speech. Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer (pictured) cited the Court's precedents, which had held that it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not actually engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed but not that his constitutional rights had been violated. (Full article...) Recently featured: George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore "The Shape of Things to Come" (Lost) Shakespeare authorship question Archive By email More featured articles... Did you know... Unita Blackwell ... that civil rights activist Unita Blackwell (pictured) was the first African-American woman to be elected mayor in the state of Mississippi? ... that soldiers lined up on the sinking British troopship SS Tyndareus began to sing "It's a Long Way to Tipperary" while waiting for orders? ... that many reviewers compared the superhero comic Ultra to the television series Sex and the City? ... that the recently named fossil egg Suchoolithus dates to the Late Jurassic, making it tied for the oldest-known crocodylomorph egg? ... that the film The Brainwashing of My Dad received funding from Kickstarter? ... that the term elastance, the inverse of capacitance, was coined by Oliver Heaviside to promote an analogy of a capacitor as a spring rather than a container of charge? ... that "Christ ist erstanden", an old German hymn mentioned as early as the 12th century, was set for choir in the 21st century? ... that despite topping his class at Sandhurst, John Gellibrand found the prospects for promotion in the British Army so bleak that he resigned his commission and moved to Tasmania to grow apples? Recent additions Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru In the London Marathon, Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru (pictured) win the women's and men's races, respectively. A Taliban attack on an Afghan National Army base kills 140 soldiers. Turkey votes in a constitutional referendum in favour of replacing its parliamentary system of government with an executive presidency. A suicide bombing of civilian evacuation buses near Aleppo, Syria, kills more than 120 people, including at least 80 children. Emma Morano, the last known living person born before 1900, dies at the age of 117. Ongoing: Battle of Mosul Recent deaths: Erin Moran Michele Scarponi Ugo Ehiogu Aaron Hernandez On this day... April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries Today's featured picture The Storm is a painting by French artist Pierre Auguste Cot completed in 1880. Currently on display at New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art, it was commissioned by Catharine Lorillard Wolfe. Suggested inspirations have included the Greek romance Daphnis and Chloe by Longus as well as the romantic tale Paul et Virginie by Bernardin de Saint-Pierre. Painting: Pierre Auguste Cot Recently featured: Charolais bull Jesse B. Jackson Dynjandi Archive More featured pictures... Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning materials and activities Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 5,393,689 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=762066868" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Main Page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Languages ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Galego ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Român? ??????? Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? This page was last modified on 26 January 2017, at 12:39. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page#p-search |||Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 5,393,689 articles in English Arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From today's featured article Stephen Breyer Heffernan v. City of Paterson was a U.S. Supreme Court case concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees, decided on April 26, 2016. Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey, police force, was seen with a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor. Heffernan's supervisors mistakenly thought that he was actively supporting the challenger and demoted him. He brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his right to free speech. Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer (pictured) cited the Court's precedents, which had held that it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not actually engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed but not that his constitutional rights had been violated. (Full article...) Recently featured: George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore "The Shape of Things to Come" (Lost) Shakespeare authorship question Archive By email More featured articles... Did you know... Unita Blackwell ... that civil rights activist Unita Blackwell (pictured) was the first African-American woman to be elected mayor in the state of Mississippi? ... that soldiers lined up on the sinking British troopship SS Tyndareus began to sing "It's a Long Way to Tipperary" while waiting for orders? ... that many reviewers compared the superhero comic Ultra to the television series Sex and the City? ... that the recently named fossil egg Suchoolithus dates to the Late Jurassic, making it tied for the oldest-known crocodylomorph egg? ... that the film The Brainwashing of My Dad received funding from Kickstarter? ... that the term elastance, the inverse of capacitance, was coined by Oliver Heaviside to promote an analogy of a capacitor as a spring rather than a container of charge? ... that "Christ ist erstanden", an old German hymn mentioned as early as the 12th century, was set for choir in the 21st century? ... that despite topping his class at Sandhurst, John Gellibrand found the prospects for promotion in the British Army so bleak that he resigned his commission and moved to Tasmania to grow apples? Recent additions Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru In the London Marathon, Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru (pictured) win the women's and men's races, respectively. A Taliban attack on an Afghan National Army base kills 140 soldiers. Turkey votes in a constitutional referendum in favour of replacing its parliamentary system of government with an executive presidency. A suicide bombing of civilian evacuation buses near Aleppo, Syria, kills more than 120 people, including at least 80 children. Emma Morano, the last known living person born before 1900, dies at the age of 117. Ongoing: Battle of Mosul Recent deaths: Erin Moran Michele Scarponi Ugo Ehiogu Aaron Hernandez On this day... April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries Today's featured picture The Storm is a painting by French artist Pierre Auguste Cot completed in 1880. Currently on display at New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art, it was commissioned by Catharine Lorillard Wolfe. Suggested inspirations have included the Greek romance Daphnis and Chloe by Longus as well as the romantic tale Paul et Virginie by Bernardin de Saint-Pierre. Painting: Pierre Auguste Cot Recently featured: Charolais bull Jesse B. Jackson Dynjandi Archive More featured pictures... Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning materials and activities Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 5,393,689 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=762066868" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Main Page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Languages ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Galego ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Român? ??????? Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? This page was last modified on 26 January 2017, at 12:39. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia |||Wikipedia From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article is about the Internet encyclopedia. For Wikipedia's home page, see Wikipedia's Main Page. For Wikipedia's visitor introduction, see Wikipedia's About Page. For other uses, see Wikipedia (disambiguation). Wikipedia The logo of Wikipedia, a globe featuring glyphs from several writing systems[notes 1] Screenshot  Main Page of the English Wikipedia on April 6, 2017 Type of site Internet encyclopedia Available in 295 languages Owner Wikimedia Foundation Created by Jimmy Wales, Larry Sanger[1] Slogan(s) The free encyclopedia that anyone can edit Website wikipedia.org Alexa rank 5 (Global, April 2017[update]) Commercial No Registration Optional[notes 2] Users >312,808 active users[notes 3] and >67,527,543 registered users Launched January 15, 2001; 16 years ago (2001-01-15) Current status Active Content license CC Attribution / Share-Alike 3.0 Most text is also dual-licensed under GFDL; media licensing varies Written in LAMP platform[2] OCLC number 52075003 Wikipedia (i/?w?k??pi?di?/ or i/?w?ki?pi?di?/ WIK-i-PEE-dee-?) is a free online encyclopedia with the aim to allow anyone to edit articles.[3] Wikipedia is the largest and most popular general reference work on the Internet[4][5][6] and is ranked among the ten most popular websites.[7] Wikipedia is owned by the nonprofit Wikimedia Foundation.[8][9][10] Wikipedia was launched on January 15, 2001, by Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger.[11] Sanger coined its name,[12][13] a portmanteau of wiki[notes 4] and encyclopedia. There was only the English language version initially, but it quickly developed similar versions in other languages, which differ in content and in editing practices. With 5,393,611 articles,[notes 5] the English Wikipedia is the largest of the more than 290 Wikipedia encyclopedias. Overall, Wikipedia consists of more than 40 million articles in more than 250 different languages[15] and, as of February 2014[update], it had 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors each month.[16] As of March 2017, Wikipedia has about forty thousand high-quality articles known as Featured Articles and Good Articles that cover vital topics.[17][18] In 2005, Nature published a peer review comparing 42 science articles from Encyclopædia Britannica and Wikipedia, and found that Wikipedia's level of accuracy approached Encyclopædia Britannica's.[19] Criticism of Wikipedia includes claims that it exhibits systemic bias, presents a mixture of "truths, half truths, and some falsehoods",[20] and that, in controversial topics, it is subject to manipulation and spin.[21] Contents 1 History 1.1 Nupedia 1.2 Launch and early growth 1.3 Milestones 2 Openness 2.1 Restrictions 2.2 Review of changes 2.3 Vandalism 3 Policies and laws 3.1 Content policies and guidelines 4 Governance 4.1 Administrators 4.2 Dispute resolution 4.2.1 Arbitration Committee 5 Community 5.1 Diversity 6 Language editions 7 Critical reception 7.1 Accuracy of content 7.1.1 Medical information 7.2 Quality of writing 7.3 Coverage of topics and systemic bias 7.3.1 Coverage of topics and selection bias 7.3.2 Systemic bias 7.3.3 Identifying the filter-bubble problem 7.4 Explicit content 7.5 Privacy 7.6 Sexism 8 Operation 8.1 Wikimedia Foundation and Wikimedia movement affiliates 8.2 Software operations and support 8.3 Automated editing 8.4 Wikiprojects, and assessments of articles' importance and quality 8.5 Hardware operations and support 8.6 Internal research and operational development 8.7 Internal news publications 9 Access to content 9.1 Content licensing 9.2 Methods of access 9.2.1 Mobile access 10 Cultural impact 10.1 Readership 10.2 Cultural significance 10.2.1 Awards 10.2.2 Satire 10.3 Sister projects – Wikimedia 10.4 Publishing 10.5 Scientific use 11 Related projects 12 See also 13 References 13.1 Notes 14 Further reading 14.1 Academic studies 14.2 Books 14.3 Book reviews and other articles 14.3.1 Learning resources 14.3.2 Other media coverage 15 External links History Main article: History of Wikipedia Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger Nupedia Wikipedia originally developed from another encyclopedia project called Nupedia Other collaborative online encyclopedias were attempted before Wikipedia, but none were so successful.[22] Wikipedia began as a complementary project for Nupedia, a free online English-language encyclopedia project whose articles were written by experts and reviewed under a formal process.[11] Nupedia was founded on March 9, 2000, under the ownership of Bomis, a web portal company. Its main figures were Jimmy Wales, the CEO of Bomis, and Larry Sanger, editor-in-chief for Nupedia and later Wikipedia. Nupedia was licensed initially under its own Nupedia Open Content License, switching to the GNU Free Documentation License before Wikipedia's founding at the urging of Richard Stallman.[23] Sanger and Wales founded Wikipedia.[24][25] While Wales is credited with defining the goal of making a publicly editable encyclopedia,[26][27] Sanger is credited with the strategy of using a wiki to reach that goal.[28] On January 10, 2001, Sanger proposed on the Nupedia mailing list to create a wiki as a "feeder" project for Nupedia.[29] Play media Wikipedia according to Simpleshow External audio The Great Book of Knowledge, Part 1, Ideas with Paul Kennedy, CBC, January 15, 2014 Launch and early growth Wikipedia was launched on January 15, 2001, as a single English-language edition at www.wikipedia.com,[30] and announced by Sanger on the Nupedia mailing list.[26] Wikipedia's policy of "neutral point-of-view"[31] was codified in its first months. Otherwise, there were relatively few rules initially and Wikipedia operated independently of Nupedia.[26] Originally, Bomis intended to make Wikipedia a business for profit.[32] Wikipedia gained early contributors from Nupedia, Slashdot postings, and web search engine indexing. By August 8, 2001, Wikipedia had over 8,000 articles.[33] On September 25, 2001, Wikipedia had over 13,000 articles.[34] By the end of 2001, it had grown to approximately 20,000 articles and 18 language editions. It had reached 26 language editions by late 2002, 46 by the end of 2003, and 161 by the final days of 2004.[35] Nupedia and Wikipedia coexisted until the former's servers were taken down permanently in 2003, and its text was incorporated into Wikipedia. The English Wikipedia passed the mark of two million articles on September 9, 2007, making it the largest encyclopedia ever assembled, surpassing even the 1408 Yongle Encyclopedia, which had held the record for almost 600 years.[36] Citing fears of commercial advertising and lack of control in Wikipedia, users of the Spanish Wikipedia forked from Wikipedia to create the Enciclopedia Libre in February 2002.[37] These moves encouraged Wales to announce that Wikipedia would not display advertisements, and to change Wikipedia's domain from wikipedia.com to wikipedia.org.[38] Though the English Wikipedia reached three million articles in August 2009, the growth of the edition, in terms of the numbers of articles and of contributors, appears to have peaked around early 2007.[39] Around 1,800 articles were added daily to the encyclopedia in 2006; by 2013 that average was roughly 800.[40] A team at the Palo Alto Research Center attributed this slowing of growth to the project's increasing exclusivity and resistance to change.[41] Others suggest that the growth is flattening naturally because articles that could be called "low-hanging fruit"—topics that clearly merit an article—have already been created and built up extensively.[42][43][44] In November 2009, a researcher at the Rey Juan Carlos University in Madrid (Spain) found that the English Wikipedia had lost 49,000 editors during the first three months of 2009; in comparison, the project lost only 4,900 editors during the same period in 2008.[45][46] The Wall Street Journal cited the array of rules applied to editing and disputes related to such content among the reasons for this trend.[47] Wales disputed these claims in 2009, denying the decline and questioning the methodology of the study.[48] Two years later, in 2011, Wales acknowledged the presence of a slight decline, noting a decrease from "a little more than 36,000 writers" in June 2010 to 35,800 in June 2011. In the same interview, Wales also claimed the number of editors was "stable and sustainable".[49] A 2013 article titled "The Decline of Wikipedia" in MIT's Technology Review questioned this claim. The article revealed that since 2007, Wikipedia had lost a third of the volunteer editors who update and correct the online encyclopedia and those still there have focused increasingly on minutiae.[50] In July 2012, the Atlantic reported that the number of administrators is also in decline.[51] In the November 25, 2013, issue of New York magazine, Katherine Ward stated "Wikipedia, the sixth-most-used website, is facing an internal crisis".[52] Wikipedia blackout protest against SOPA on January 18, 2012 Play media A promotional video of the Wikimedia Foundation that encourages viewers to edit Wikipedia, mostly reviewing 2014 via Wikipedia content Milestones In January 2007, Wikipedia entered for the first time the top-ten list of the most popular websites in the U.S., according to comScore Networks. With 42.9 million unique visitors, Wikipedia was ranked number 9, surpassing the New York Times (#10) and Apple (#11). This marked a significant increase over January 2006, when the rank was number 33, with Wikipedia receiving around 18.3 million unique visitors.[53] As of March 2015[update], Wikipedia has rank 5[7][54] among websites in terms of popularity according to Alexa Internet. In 2014, it received 8 billion pageviews every month.[55] On February 9, 2014, The New York Times reported that Wikipedia has 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors a month, "according to the ratings firm comScore."[16] On January 18, 2012, the English Wikipedia participated in a series of coordinated protests against two proposed laws in the United States Congress—the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA) and the PROTECT IP Act (PIPA)—by blacking out its pages for 24 hours.[56] More than 162 million people viewed the blackout explanation page that temporarily replaced Wikipedia content.[57][58] Loveland and Reagle argue that, in process, Wikipedia follows a long tradition of historical encyclopedias that accumulated improvements piecemeal through "stigmergic accumulation".[59][60] On January 20, 2014, Subodh Varma reporting for The Economic Times indicated that not only had Wikipedia's growth flattened but that it has "lost nearly 10 per cent of its page-views last year. That's a decline of about 2 billion between December 2012 and December 2013. Its most popular versions are leading the slide: page-views of the English Wikipedia declined by 12 per cent, those of German version slid by 17 per cent and the Japanese version lost 9 per cent."[61] Varma added that, "While Wikipedia's managers think that this could be due to errors in counting, other experts feel that Google's Knowledge Graphs project launched last year may be gobbling up Wikipedia users."[61] When contacted on this matter, Clay Shirky, associate professor at New York University and fellow at Harvard's Berkman Center for Internet and Security indicated that he suspected much of the page view decline was due to Knowledge Graphs, stating, "If you can get your question answered from the search page, you don't need to click [any further]."[61] By the end of December 2016, Wikipedia was ranked fifth in the most popular websites globally.[62] Number of Wikipedia articles[63] Wikipedia editors with >100 edits per month[63] Openness Differences between versions of an article are highlighted as shown Unlike traditional encyclopedias, Wikipedia follows the procrastination principle[notes 6][64] regarding the security of its content.[64] It started almost entirely open—anyone could create articles, and any Wikipedia article could be edited by any reader, even those who did not have a Wikipedia account. Modifications to all articles would be published immediately. As a result, any article could contain inaccuracies such as errors, ideological biases, and nonsensical or irrelevant text. Restrictions Due to the increasing popularity of Wikipedia, popular editions, including the English version, have introduced editing restrictions in some cases. For instance, on the English Wikipedia and some other language editions, only registered users may create a new article.[65] On the English Wikipedia, among others, some particularly controversial, sensitive and/or vandalism-prone pages have been protected to some degree.[66][67] A frequently vandalized article can be semi-protected or extended confirmed protected, meaning that only autoconfirmed or extended confirmed editors are able to modify it.[68] A particularly contentious article may be locked so that only administrators are able to make changes.[69] In certain cases, all editors are allowed to submit modifications, but review is required for some editors, depending on certain conditions. For example, the German Wikipedia maintains "stable versions" of articles,[70] which have passed certain reviews. Following protracted trials and community discussion, the English Wikipedia introduced the "pending changes" system in December 2012.[71] Under this system, new and unregistered users' edits to certain controversial or vandalism-prone articles are reviewed by established users before they are published.[72] The editing interface of Wikipedia Review of changes Although changes are not systematically reviewed, the software that powers Wikipedia provides certain tools allowing anyone to review changes made by others. The "History" page of each article links to each revision.[notes 7][73] On most articles, anyone can undo others' changes by clicking a link on the article's history page. Anyone can view the latest changes to articles, and anyone may maintain a "watchlist" of articles that interest them so they can be notified of any changes. "New pages patrol" is a process whereby newly created articles are checked for obvious problems.[74] In 2003, economics PhD student Andrea Ciffolilli argued that the low transaction costs of participating in a wiki create a catalyst for collaborative development, and that features such as allowing easy access to past versions of a page favor "creative construction" over "creative destruction".[75] Vandalism Main article: Vandalism on Wikipedia Any change or edit that manipulates content in a way that purposefully compromises the integrity of Wikipedia is considered vandalism. The most common and obvious types of vandalism include additions of obscenities and crude humor. Vandalism can also include advertising and other types of spam.[76] Sometimes editors commit vandalism by removing content or entirely blanking a given page. Less common types of vandalism, such as the deliberate addition of plausible but false information to an article, can be more difficult to detect. Vandals can introduce irrelevant formatting, modify page semantics such as the page's title or categorization, manipulate the underlying code of an article, or use images disruptively.[77] American journalist John Seigenthaler (1927–2014), subject of the Seigenthaler incident Obvious vandalism is generally easy to remove from Wikipedia articles; the median time to detect and fix vandalism is a few minutes.[78][79] However, some vandalism takes much longer to repair.[80] In the Seigenthaler biography incident, an anonymous editor introduced false information into the biography of American political figure John Seigenthaler in May 2005. Seigenthaler was falsely presented as a suspect in the assassination of John F. Kennedy.[80] The article remained uncorrected for four months.[80] Seigenthaler, the founding editorial director of USA Today and founder of the Freedom Forum First Amendment Center at Vanderbilt University, called Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales and asked whether he had any way of knowing who contributed the misinformation. Wales replied that he did not, although the perpetrator was eventually traced.[81][82] After the incident, Seigenthaler described Wikipedia as "a flawed and irresponsible research tool".[80] This incident led to policy changes at Wikipedia, specifically targeted at tightening up the verifiability of biographical articles of living people.[83] Policies and laws See also: Wikipedia:Five Pillars External video Wikimania, 60 Minutes, CBS, 20 minutes, April 5, 2015, co-founder Jimmy Wales at Fosdem Content in Wikipedia is subject to the laws (in particular, copyright laws) of the United States and of the U.S. state of Virginia, where the majority of Wikipedia's servers are located. Beyond legal matters, the editorial principles of Wikipedia are embodied in the "five pillars" and in numerous policies and guidelines intended to appropriately shape content. Even these rules are stored in wiki form, and Wikipedia editors write and revise the website's policies and guidelines.[84] Editors can enforce these rules by deleting or modifying non-compliant material. Originally, rules on the non-English editions of Wikipedia were based on a translation of the rules for the English Wikipedia. They have since diverged to some extent.[70] Content policies and guidelines According to the rules on the English Wikipedia, each entry in Wikipedia must be about a topic that is encyclopedic and is not a dictionary entry or dictionary-like.[85] A topic should also meet Wikipedia's standards of "notability",[86] which generally means that the topic must have been covered in mainstream media or major academic journal sources that are independent of the article's subject. Further, Wikipedia intends to convey only knowledge that is already established and recognized.[87] It must not present original research. A claim that is likely to be challenged requires a reference to a reliable source. Among Wikipedia editors, this is often phrased as "verifiability, not truth" to express the idea that the readers, not the encyclopedia, are ultimately responsible for checking the truthfulness of the articles and making their own interpretations.[88] This can at times lead to the removal of information that is valid.[89] Finally, Wikipedia must not take sides.[90] All opinions and viewpoints, if attributable to external sources, must enjoy an appropriate share of coverage within an article.[91] This is known as neutral point of view (NPOV). Governance Further information: Wikipedia:Administration Wikipedia's initial anarchy integrated democratic and hierarchical elements over time.[92][93] An article is not considered to be owned by its creator or any other editor and is not vetted by any recognized authority.[94] Wikipedia's contributors avoid a tragedy of the commons by internalizing benefits. They do this by experiencing flow and identifying with and gaining status in the Wikipedia community.[95] Administrators Editors in good standing in the community can run for one of many levels of volunteer stewardship: this begins with "administrator",[96][97] privileged users who can delete pages, prevent articles from being changed in case of vandalism or editorial disputes, and try to prevent certain persons from editing. Despite the name, administrators are not supposed to enjoy any special privilege in decision-making; instead, their powers are mostly limited to making edits that have project-wide effects and thus are disallowed to ordinary editors, and to implement restrictions intended to prevent certain persons from making disruptive edits (such as vandalism).[98][99] Fewer editors become administrators than in years past, in part because the process of vetting potential Wikipedia administrators has become more rigorous.[100] Bureaucrats name new administrators, solely upon the recommendations from the community. Dispute resolution Wikipedians often have disputes regarding content, which may result in repeatedly making opposite changes to an article, known as edit warring[101][102] Over time, Wikipedia has developed a semi-formal dispute resolution process to assist in such circumstances. In order to determine community consensus, editors can raise issues at appropriate community forums,[notes 8] or seek outside input through third opinion requests or by initiating a more general community discussion known as a request for comment. Arbitration Committee Main article: Arbitration Committee The Arbitration Committee presides over the ultimate dispute resolution process. Although disputes usually arise from a disagreement between two opposing views on how an article should read, the Arbitration Committee explicitly refuses to directly rule on the specific view that should be adopted. Statistical analyses suggest that the committee ignores the content of disputes and rather focuses on the way disputes are conducted,[103] functioning not so much to resolve disputes and make peace between conflicting editors, but to weed out problematic editors while allowing potentially productive editors back in to participate. Therefore, the committee does not dictate the content of articles, although it sometimes condemns content changes when it deems the new content violates Wikipedia policies (for example, if the new content is considered biased). Its remedies include cautions and probations (used in 63% of cases) and banning editors from articles (43%), subject matters (23%) or Wikipedia (16%). Complete bans from Wikipedia are generally limited to instances of impersonation and anti-social behavior. When conduct is not impersonation or anti-social, but rather anti-consensus or in violation of editing policies, remedies tend to be limited to warnings.[104] Community Main article: Wikipedia community Play media Video of Wikimania 2005 – an annual conference for users of Wikipedia and other projects operated by the Wikimedia Foundation, was held in Frankfurt am Main, Germany from August 4 to 8. Each article and each user of Wikipedia has an associated "Talk" page. These form the primary communication channel for editors to discuss, coordinate and debate.[105] Play media Wikipedians and British Museum curators collaborate on the article Hoxne Hoard in June 2010 Wikipedia's community has been described as cult-like,[106] although not always with entirely negative connotations.[107] The project's preference for cohesiveness, even if it requires compromise that includes disregard of credentials, has been referred to as "anti-elitism".[108] Wikipedians sometimes award one another virtual barnstars for good work. These personalized tokens of appreciation reveal a wide range of valued work extending far beyond simple editing to include social support, administrative actions, and types of articulation work.[109] Wikipedia does not require that its editors and contributors provide identification.[110] As Wikipedia grew, "Who writes Wikipedia?" became one of the questions frequently asked on the project.[111] Jimmy Wales once argued that only "a community ... a dedicated group of a few hundred volunteers" makes the bulk of contributions to Wikipedia and that the project is therefore "much like any traditional organization".[112] In 2008, a Slate magazine article reported that: "According to researchers in Palo Alto, 1 percent of Wikipedia users are responsible for about half of the site's edits."[113] This method of evaluating contributions was later disputed by Aaron Swartz, who noted that several articles he sampled had large portions of their content (measured by number of characters) contributed by users with low edit counts.[114] The English Wikipedia has 5,393,611 articles, 30,795,277 registered editors, and 135,691 active editors. An editor is considered active if they have made one or more edits in the past thirty days. Editors who fail to comply with Wikipedia cultural rituals, such as signing talk page comments, may implicitly signal that they are Wikipedia outsiders, increasing the odds that Wikipedia insiders may target or discount their contributions. Becoming a Wikipedia insider involves non-trivial costs: the contributor is expected to learn Wikipedia-specific technological codes, submit to a sometimes convoluted dispute resolution process, and learn a "baffling culture rich with in-jokes and insider references".[115] Editors who do not log in are in some sense second-class citizens on Wikipedia,[115] as "participants are accredited by members of the wiki community, who have a vested interest in preserving the quality of the work product, on the basis of their ongoing participation",[116] but the contribution histories of anonymous unregistered editors recognized only by their IP addresses cannot be attributed to a particular editor with certainty. A 2007 study by researchers from Dartmouth College found that "anonymous and infrequent contributors to Wikipedia […] are as reliable a source of knowledge as those contributors who register with the site".[117] Jimmy Wales stated in 2009 that "(I)t turns out over 50% of all the edits are done by just .7% of the users... 524 people... And in fact the most active 2%, which is 1400 people, have done 73.4% of all the edits."[112] However, Business Insider editor and journalist Henry Blodget showed in 2009 that in a random sample of articles, most content in Wikipedia (measured by the amount of contributed text that survives to the latest sampled edit) is created by "outsiders", while most editing and formatting is done by "insiders".[112] A 2008 study found that Wikipedians were less agreeable, open, and conscientious than others,[118][119] although a later commentary pointed out serious flaws, including that the data showed higher openness, that the differences with the control group were small as were the samples.[120] According to a 2009 study, there is "evidence of growing resistance from the Wikipedia community to new content".[121] Diversity Wikipedia editor demographics (2008) One study found that the contributor base to Wikipedia "was barely 13% women; the average age of a contributor was in the mid-20s".[122] A 2011 study by researchers from the University of Minnesota found that females comprised 16.1% of the 38,497 editors who started editing Wikipedia during 2009.[123] In a January 2011 New York Times article, Noam Cohen observed that just 13% of Wikipedia's contributors are female according to a 2008 Wikimedia Foundation survey.[124] Sue Gardner, a former executive director of the Wikimedia Foundation, hoped to see female contributions increase to 25% by 2015.[125] Linda Basch, president of the National Council for Research on Women, noted the contrast in these Wikipedia editor statistics with the percentage of women currently completing bachelor's degrees, master's degrees and PhD programs in the United States (all at rates of 50 percent or greater).[126] In response, various universities have hosted edit-a-thons to encourage more women to participate in the Wikipedia community. In fall 2013, 15 colleges and universities — including Yale, Brown, and Pennsylvania State — offered college credit for students to "write feminist thinking" about technology into Wikipedia.[127] Estimates of the diversity of contributors by educational level have indicated that sixty-two percent of Wikipedia's editors are at the high school and undergraduate college level of education.[128] In August 2014, Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales said in a BBC interview that the Wikimedia Foundation was "... really doubling down our efforts ..." to reach 25% of female editors (originally targeted by 2015), since the Foundation had "totally failed" so far. Wales said "a lot of things need to happen ... a lot of outreach, a lot of software changes".[129] Andrew Lih, writing in The New York Times, was quoted by Bloomberg News in December 2016 as supporting Wales comments concerning shortfalls in Wikipedia's outreach to female editors. Lih states his concern with the question indicating that: "How can you get people to participate in an (editing) environment that feels unsafe, where identifying yourself as a woman, as a feminist, could open you up to ugly, intimidating behavior".[130] Language editions There are currently 295 language editions of Wikipedia (also called language versions, or simply Wikipedias). Thirteen of these have over one million articles each (English, Swedish, Cebuano, German, Dutch, French, Russian, Italian, Spanish, Waray-Waray, Polish, Vietnamese and Japanese), five more have over 500,000 articles (Portuguese, Chinese, Ukrainian, Catalan and Persian), 40 more have over 100,000 articles, and 77 more have over 10,000 articles.[131][132] The largest, the English Wikipedia, has over 5.3 million articles. As of January 2017[update], according to Alexa, the English subdomain (en.wikipedia.org; English Wikipedia) receives approximately 55% of Wikipedia's cumulative traffic, with the remaining split among the other languages (Russian: 9%; Japanese: 7%; Spanish: 6%; French: 4%).[7] As of April 2017, the six largest language editions are (in order of article count) the English, Cebuano, Swedish, German, Dutch, and French Wikipedias.[133] Distribution of the 44,160,825 articles in different language editions (as of 26 April 2017)[134]   English (12.2%)   Cebuano (9.4%)   Swedish (8.6%)   German (4.6%)   Dutch (4.3%)   French (4.2%)   Russian (3.1%)   Italian (3%)   Spanish (3%)   Waray (2.9%)   Polish (2.8%)   Vietnamese (2.6%)   Japanese (2.4%)   Portuguese (2.2%)   Other (34.7%) Logarithmic graph of the 20 largest language editions of Wikipedia (as of 26 April 2017)[135] (millions of articles) 0.1 0.3 1 3 English 5,393,611 Cebuano 4,138,135 Swedish 3,785,049 German 2,048,714 Dutch 1,897,908 French 1,858,259 Russian 1,384,908 Italian 1,346,331 Spanish 1,327,066 Waray 1,262,379 Polish 1,215,642 Vietnamese 1,155,136 Japanese 1,055,534 Portuguese 964,262 Chinese 934,268 Ukrainian 688,922 Catalan 538,744 Persian 526,845 Arabic 513,311 Norwegian 464,789 The unit for the numbers in bars is articles. Since Wikipedia is based on the Web and therefore worldwide, contributors to the same language edition may use different dialects or may come from different countries (as is the case for the English edition). These differences may lead to some conflicts over spelling differences (e.g. colour versus color)[136] or points of view.[137] Though the various language editions are held to global policies such as "neutral point of view", they diverge on some points of policy and practice, most notably on whether images that are not licensed freely may be used under a claim of fair use.[138][139][140] Jimmy Wales has described Wikipedia as "an effort to create and distribute a free encyclopedia of the highest possible quality to every single person on the planet in their own language".[141] Though each language edition functions more or less independently, some efforts are made to supervise them all. They are coordinated in part by Meta-Wiki, the Wikimedia Foundation's wiki devoted to maintaining all of its projects (Wikipedia and others).[142] For instance, Meta-Wiki provides important statistics on all language editions of Wikipedia,[143] and it maintains a list of articles every Wikipedia should have.[144] The list concerns basic content by subject: biography, history, geography, society, culture, science, technology, and mathematics. As for the rest, it is not rare for articles strongly related to a particular language not to have counterparts in another edition. For example, articles about small towns in the United States might only be available in English, even when they meet notability criteria of other language Wikipedia projects. Estimation of contributions shares from different regions in the world to different Wikipedia editions Translated articles represent only a small portion of articles in most editions, in part because fully automated translation of articles is disallowed.[145] Articles available in more than one language may offer "interwiki links", which link to the counterpart articles in other editions. A study published by PLOS ONE in 2012 also estimated the share of contributions to different editions of Wikipedia from different regions of the world. It reported that the proportion of the edits made from North America was 51% for the English Wikipedia, and 25% for the simple English Wikipedia.[146] The Wikimedia Foundation hopes to increase the number of editors in the Global South to thirty-seven percent by 2015.[147] On March 1, 2014, The Economist in an article titled "The Future of Wikipedia" cited a trend analysis concerning data published by Wikimedia stating that: "The number of editors for the English-language version has fallen by a third in seven years."[148] The attrition rate for active editors in English Wikipedia was cited by The Economist as substantially in contrast to statistics for Wikipedia in other languages (non-English Wikipedia). The Economist reported that the number of contributors with an average of five of more edits per month was relatively constant since 2008 for Wikipedia in other languages at approximately 42,000 editors within narrow seasonal variances of about 2,000 editors up or down. The attrition rates for editors in English Wikipedia, by sharp comparison, were cited as peaking in 2007 at approximately 50,000 editors which has dropped to 30,000 editors as of the start of 2014. At the quoted trend rate, the number of active editors in English Wikipedia has lost approximately 20,000 editors to attrition since 2007, and the documented trend rate indicates the loss of another 20,000 editors by 2021, down to 10,000 active editors on English Wikipedia by 2021 if left unabated.[148] Given that the trend analysis published in The Economist presents the number of active editors for Wikipedia in other languages (non-English Wikipedia) as remaining relatively constant and successful in sustaining its numbers at approximately 42,000 active editors, the contrast has pointed to the effectiveness of Wikipedia in other languages to retain its active editors on a renewable and sustained basis.[148] No comment was made concerning which of the differentiated edit policy standards from Wikipedia in other languages (non-English Wikipedia) would provide a possible alternative to English Wikipedia for effectively ameliorating substantial editor attrition rates on the English language Wikipedia.[149] Critical reception See also: Academic studies about Wikipedia and Criticism of Wikipedia Several Wikipedians have criticized Wikipedia's large and growing regulation, which includes over 50 policies and nearly 150,000 words as of 2014[update].[150][151] Critics have stated that Wikipedia exhibits systemic bias. Columnist and journalist Edwin Black criticizes Wikipedia for being a mixture of "truth, half truth, and some falsehoods".[20] Articles in The Chronicle of Higher Education and The Journal of Academic Librarianship have criticized Wikipedia's Undue Weight policy, concluding that the fact that Wikipedia explicitly is not designed to provide correct information about a subject, but rather focus on all the major viewpoints on the subject and give less attention to minor ones, creates omissions that can lead to false beliefs based on incomplete information.[152][153][154] Journalists Oliver Kamm and Edwin Black noted how articles are dominated by the loudest and most persistent voices, usually by a group with an "ax to grind" on the topic.[20][155] An article in Education Next Journal concluded that as a resource about controversial topics, Wikipedia is notoriously subject to manipulation and spin.[21] In 2006, the Wikipedia Watch criticism website listed dozens of examples of plagiarism in the English Wikipedia.[156] Accuracy of content Main article: Reliability of Wikipedia Articles for traditional encyclopedias such as Encyclopædia Britannica are carefully and deliberately written by experts, lending such encyclopedias a reputation for accuracy.[157] Conversely, Wikipedia is often cited for factual inaccuracies and misrepresentations. However, a peer review in 2005 of forty-two scientific entries on both Wikipedia and Encyclopædia Britannica by the science journal Nature found few differences in accuracy, and concluded that "the average science entry in Wikipedia contained around four inaccuracies; Britannica, about three."[19] Reagle suggested that while the study reflects "a topical strength of Wikipedia contributors" in science articles, "Wikipedia may not have fared so well using a random sampling of articles or on humanities subjects."[158] The findings by Nature were disputed by Encyclopædia Britannica,[159][160] and in response, Nature gave a rebuttal of the points raised by Britannica.[161] In addition to the point-for-point disagreement between these two parties, others have examined the sample size and selection method used in the Nature effort, and suggested a "flawed study design" (in Nature's manual selection of articles, in part or in whole, for comparison), absence of statistical analysis (e.g., of reported confidence intervals), and a lack of study "statistical power" (i.e., owing to small sample size, 42 or 4 x 101 articles compared, vs >105 and >106 set sizes for Britannica and the English Wikipedia, respectively).[162] As a consequence of the open structure, Wikipedia "makes no guarantee of validity" of its content, since no one is ultimately responsible for any claims appearing in it.[163] Concerns have been raised by PC World in 2009 regarding the lack of accountability that results from users' anonymity,[164] the insertion of false information,[165] vandalism, and similar problems. Economist Tyler Cowen wrote: "If I had to guess whether Wikipedia or the median refereed journal article on economics was more likely to be true, after a not so long think I would opt for Wikipedia." He comments that some traditional sources of non-fiction suffer from systemic biases and novel results, in his opinion, are over-reported in journal articles and relevant information is omitted from news reports. However, he also cautions that errors are frequently found on Internet sites, and that academics and experts must be vigilant in correcting them.[166] Critics argue that Wikipedia's open nature and a lack of proper sources for most of the information makes it unreliable.[167] Some commentators suggest that Wikipedia may be reliable, but that the reliability of any given article is not clear.[168] Editors of traditional reference works such as the Encyclopædia Britannica have questioned the project's utility and status as an encyclopedia.[169] External video Inside Wikipedia – Attack of the PR Industry, Deutsche Welle, 7:13 mins[170] Wikipedia's open structure inherently makes it an easy target for Internet trolls, spammers, and various forms of paid advocacy seen as counterproductive to the maintenance of a neutral and verifiable online encyclopedia.[73][171] In response to paid advocacy editing and undisclosed editing issues, Wikipedia was reported in an article by Jeff Elder in The Wall Street Journal on June 16, 2014, to have strengthened its rules and laws against undisclosed editing.[172] The article stated that: "Beginning Monday [from date of article], changes in Wikipedia's terms of use will require anyone paid to edit articles to disclose that arrangement. Katherine Maher, the nonprofit Wikimedia Foundation's chief communications officer, said the changes address a sentiment among volunteer editors that, 'we're not an advertising service; we're an encyclopedia.'"[172][173][174][175][176] These issues, among others, had been parodied since the first decade of Wikipedia, notably by Stephen Colbert on The Colbert Report.[177] Most university lecturers discourage students from citing any encyclopedia in academic work, preferring primary sources;[178] some specifically prohibit Wikipedia citations.[179][180] Wales stresses that encyclopedias of any type are not usually appropriate to use as citeable sources, and should not be relied upon as authoritative.[181] Wales once (2006 or earlier) said he receives about ten emails weekly from students saying they got failing grades on papers because they cited Wikipedia; he told the students they got what they deserved. "For God's sake, you're in college; don't cite the encyclopedia", he said.[182] In February 2007, an article in The Harvard Crimson newspaper reported that a few of the professors at Harvard University were including Wikipedia articles in their syllabi, although without realizing the articles might change.[183] In June 2007, former president of the American Library Association Michael Gorman condemned Wikipedia, along with Google,[184] stating that academics who endorse the use of Wikipedia are "the intellectual equivalent of a dietitian who recommends a steady diet of Big Macs with everything". A Harvard law textbook, Legal Research in a Nutshell (2011), cites Wikipedia as a "general source" that "can be a real boon" in "coming up to speed in the law governing a situation" and, "while not authoritative, can provide basic facts as well as leads to more in-depth resources".[185] Medical information See also: Health information on Wikipedia On March 5, 2014, Julie Beck writing for The Atlantic magazine in an article titled "Doctors' #1 Source for Healthcare Information: Wikipedia", stated that "Fifty percent of physicians look up conditions on the (Wikipedia) site, and some are editing articles themselves to improve the quality of available information."[186] Beck continued to detail in this article new programs of Dr. Amin Azzam at the University of San Francisco to offer medical school courses to medical students for learning to edit and improve Wikipedia articles on health-related issues, as well as internal quality control programs within Wikipedia organized by Dr. James Heilman to improve a group of 200 health-related articles of central medical importance up to Wikipedia's highest standard of articles using its Featured Article and Good Article peer review evaluation process.[186] In a May 7, 2014, follow-up article in The Atlantic titled "Can Wikipedia Ever Be a Definitive Medical Text?", Julie Beck quotes Wikiproject Medicine's Dr. James Heilman as stating: "Just because a reference is peer-reviewed doesn't mean it's a high-quality reference."[187] Beck added that: "Wikipedia has its own peer review process before articles can be classified as 'good' or 'featured.' Heilman, who has participated in that process before, says 'less than 1 percent' of Wikipedia's medical articles have passed.[187] Quality of writing In 2008, researchers at Carnegie Mellon University found that the quality of a Wikipedia article would suffer rather than gain from adding more writers when the article lacked appropriate explicit or implicit coordination.[188] For instance, when contributors rewrite small portions of an entry rather than making full-length revisions, high- and low-quality content may be intermingled within an entry. Roy Rosenzweig, a history professor, stated that American National Biography Online outperformed Wikipedia in terms of its "clear and engaging prose", which, he said, was an important aspect of good historical writing.[189] Contrasting Wikipedia's treatment of Abraham Lincoln to that of Civil War historian James McPherson in American National Biography Online, he said that both were essentially accurate and covered the major episodes in Lincoln's life, but praised "McPherson's richer contextualization […] his artful use of quotations to capture Lincoln's voice […] and […] his ability to convey a profound message in a handful of words." By contrast, he gives an example of Wikipedia's prose that he finds "both verbose and dull". Rosenzweig also criticized the "waffling—encouraged by the NPOV policy—[which] means that it is hard to discern any overall interpretive stance in Wikipedia history". By example, he quoted the conclusion of Wikipedia's article on William Clarke Quantrill. While generally praising the article, he pointed out its "waffling" conclusion: "Some historians […] remember him as an opportunistic, bloodthirsty outlaw, while others continue to view him as a daring soldier and local folk hero."[189] Other critics have made similar charges that, even if Wikipedia articles are factually accurate, they are often written in a poor, almost unreadable style. Frequent Wikipedia critic Andrew Orlowski commented: "Even when a Wikipedia entry is 100 per cent factually correct, and those facts have been carefully chosen, it all too often reads as if it has been translated from one language to another then into to a third, passing an illiterate translator at each stage."[190] A study of Wikipedia articles on cancer was conducted in 2010 by Yaacov Lawrence of the Kimmel Cancer Center at Thomas Jefferson University. The study was limited to those articles that could be found in the Physician Data Query and excluded those written at the "start" class or "stub" class level. Lawrence found the articles accurate but not very readable, and thought that "Wikipedia's lack of readability (to non-college readers) may reflect its varied origins and haphazard editing".[191] The Economist argued that better-written articles tend to be more reliable: "inelegant or ranting prose usually reflects muddled thoughts and incomplete information".[192] Coverage of topics and systemic bias See also: Notability in the English Wikipedia and Criticism of Wikipedia § Systemic bias in coverage Parts of this article (those related to d:Wikidata:Statistics/Wikipedia) need to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (March 2017) Wikipedia seeks to create a summary of all human knowledge in the form of an online encyclopedia, with each topic covered encyclopedically in one article. Since it has terabytes of disk space, it can have far more topics than can be covered by any printed encyclopedia.[193] The exact degree and manner of coverage on Wikipedia is under constant review by its editors, and disagreements are not uncommon (see deletionism and inclusionism).[194][195] Wikipedia contains materials that some people may find objectionable, offensive, or pornographic because Wikipedia is not censored. The policy has sometimes proved controversial: in 2008, Wikipedia rejected an online petition against the inclusion of images of Muhammad in the English edition of its Muhammad article, citing this policy. The presence of politically, religiously, and pornographically sensitive materials in Wikipedia has led to the censorship of Wikipedia by national authorities in China,[196] Pakistan,[197] and the United Kingdom,[198] among other countries. Pie chart of Wikipedia content by subject as of January 2008[199] A 2008 study conducted by researchers at Carnegie Mellon University and Palo Alto Research Center gave a distribution of topics as well as growth (from July 2006 to January 2008) in each field:[199] Culture and the arts: 30% (210%) Biographies and persons: 15% (97%) Geography and places: 14% (52%) Society and social sciences: 12% (83%) History and events: 11% (143%) Natural and physical sciences: 9% (213%) Technology and the applied sciences: 4% (?6%) Religions and belief systems: 2% (38%) Health: 2% (42%) Mathematics and logic: 1% (146%) Thought and philosophy: 1% (160%) These numbers refer only to the quantity of articles: it is possible for one topic to contain a large number of short articles and another to contain a small number of large ones. Through its "Wikipedia Loves Libraries" program, Wikipedia has partnered with major public libraries such as the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts to expand its coverage of underrepresented subjects and articles.[200] A 2011 study conducted by researchers at the University of Minnesota indicated that male and female editors focus on different coverage topics. There was a greater concentration of females in the People and Arts category, while males focus more on Geography and Science.[201] Coverage of topics and selection bias Research conducted by Mark Graham of the Oxford Internet Institute in 2009 indicated that the geographic distribution of article topics is highly uneven. Africa is most underrepresented.[202] An editorial in The Guardian in 2014 noted that women porn stars are better covered than women writers as a further example.[203] Systemic bias When multiple editors contribute to one topic or set of topics, systemic bias may arise, due to the demographic backgrounds of the editors. In 2011, Wales noted that the unevenness of coverage is a reflection of the demography of the editors, which predominantly consists of young males with high education levels in the developed world (cf. previously).[49] The October 22, 2013 essay by Tom Simonite in MIT's Technology Review titled "The Decline of Wikipedia" discussed the effect of systemic bias and policy creep on the downward trend in the number of editors.[50] Systemic bias on Wikipedia may follow that of culture generally, for example favoring certain nationalities, ethnicities or majority religions.[204] It may more specifically follow the biases of Internet culture, inclining to being young, male, English-speaking, educated, technologically aware, and wealthy enough to spare time for editing. Biases of its own may include over-emphasis on topics such as pop culture, technology, and current events.[204] Taha Yasseri of the University of Oxford, in 2013, studied the statistical trends of systemic bias at Wikipedia introduced by editing conflicts and their resolution.[205][206] His research examined the counterproductive work behavior of edit warring. Yasseri contended that simple reverts or "undo" operations were not the most significant measure of counterproductive behavior at Wikipedia and relied instead on the statistical measurement of detecting "reverting/reverted pairs" or "mutually reverting edit pairs". Such a "mutually reverting edit pair" is defined where one editor reverts the edit of another editor who then, in sequence, returns to revert the first editor in the "mutually reverting edit pairs". The results were tabulated for several language versions of Wikipedia. The English Wikipedia's three largest conflict rates belonged to the articles George W. Bush, Anarchism and Muhammad.[206] By comparison, for the German Wikipedia, the three largest conflict rates at the time of the Oxford study were for the articles covering (i) Croatia, (ii) Scientology and (iii) 9/11 conspiracy theories.[206] Researchers from the Washington University developed a statistical model to measure systematic bias in the behavior of Wikipedia's users regarding controversial topics. The authors focused on behavioral changes of the encyclopedia's administrators after assuming the post, writing that systematic bias occurred after the fact.[207][208] Identifying the filter-bubble problem Dimitra Kessenides, writing for Bloomberg News Weekly, identified the 'filter-bubble' problem as a recurrent and long-standing issue at Wikipedia.[209] As Kessenides states: "If the only way to get an article about the developing world published on Wikipedia was to know a former board member, it was hard to imagine how a random editor in Johannesburg or Bangalore would have any hope... This so-called filter-bubble problem, coined by Eli Pariser, co-founder of the viral video site Upworthy, is the idea that the internet can contribute to the insularity of certain communities. Filter bubbles have been blamed for the spread of misinformation during the 2016 presidential election and for the failure of pundits in the U.K. to anticipate Brexit... Wikipedia's filter-bubble problem is a particularly acute threat for an organization whose stated mission is 'to empower and engage people around the world.'"[209] Explicit content See also: Internet Watch Foundation and Wikipedia and Reporting of child pornography images on Wikimedia Commons “ Problem? What problem? So, you didn't know that Wikipedia has a porn problem? ” — Larry Sanger, [210] Wikipedia has been criticized for allowing information of graphic content. Articles depicting arguably objectionable content (such as Feces, Cadaver, Human penis, Vulva, and Nudity) contain graphic pictures and detailed information easily available to anyone with access to the internet, including children. The site also includes sexual content such as images and videos of masturbation and ejaculation, photographs of nude children, illustrations of zoophilia, and photos from hardcore pornographic films in its articles. The Wikipedia article about Virgin Killer—a 1976 album from German heavy metal band Scorpions—features a picture of the album's original cover, which depicts a naked prepubescent girl. The original release cover caused controversy and was replaced in some countries. In December 2008, access to the Wikipedia article Virgin Killer was blocked for four days by most Internet service providers in the United Kingdom after it was reported by a member of the public as child pornography,[211] to the Internet Watch Foundation (IWF), which issues a stop list to Internet service providers. IWF, a non-profit, non-government-affiliated organization, later criticized the inclusion of the picture as "distasteful".[212] In April 2010, Sanger wrote a letter to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, outlining his concerns that two categories of images on Wikimedia Commons contained child pornography, and were in violation of US federal obscenity law.[213] Sanger later clarified that the images, which were related to pedophilia and one about lolicon, were not of real children, but said that they constituted "obscene visual representations of the sexual abuse of children", under the PROTECT Act of 2003.[214] That law bans photographic child pornography and cartoon images and drawings of children that are obscene under American law.[214] Sanger also expressed concerns about access to the images on Wikipedia in schools.[215] Wikimedia Foundation spokesman Jay Walsh strongly rejected Sanger's accusation,[216] saying that Wikipedia did not have "material we would deem to be illegal. If we did, we would remove it."[216] Following the complaint by Sanger, Wales deleted sexual images without consulting the community. After some editors who volunteer to maintain the site argued that the decision to delete had been made hastily, Wales voluntarily gave up some of the powers he had held up to that time as part of his co-founder status. He wrote in a message to the Wikimedia Foundation mailing-list that this action was "in the interest of encouraging this discussion to be about real philosophical/content issues, rather than be about me and how quickly I acted".[217] Critics, including Wikipediocracy, noticed that many of the pornographic images deleted from Wikipedia since 2010 have reappeared.[218] Privacy One privacy concern in the case of Wikipedia is the right of a private citizen to remain a "private citizen" rather than a "public figure" in the eyes of the law.[219][notes 9] It is a battle between the right to be anonymous in cyberspace and the right to be anonymous in real life ("meatspace"). A particular problem occurs in the case of an individual who is relatively unimportant and for whom there exists a Wikipedia page against her or his wishes. In January 2006, a German court ordered the German Wikipedia shut down within Germany because it stated the full name of Boris Floricic, aka "Tron", a deceased hacker. On February 9, 2006, the injunction against Wikimedia Deutschland was overturned, with the court rejecting the notion that Tron's right to privacy or that of his parents was being violated.[220] Wikipedia has a "Volunteer Response Team" that uses the OTRS system to handle queries without having to reveal the identities of the involved parties. This is used, for example, in confirming the permission for using individual images and other media in the project.[221] Sexism Wikipedia has been described as harboring a battleground culture of sexism and harassment.[222][223] The perceived toxic attitudes and tolerance of violent and abusive language are also reasons put forth for the gender gap in Wikipedia editors.[224] In 2014, a female editor who requested a separate space on Wikipedia to discuss improving civility had her proposal referred to by a male editor using the words "the easiest way to avoid being called a cunt is not to act like one."[225] Operation A group of Wikipedia editors may form a WikiProject to focus their work on a specific topic area, using its associated discussion page to coordinate changes across multiple articles.[226] Wikimedia Foundation and Wikimedia movement affiliates Main article: Wikimedia Foundation Katherine Maher is the third executive director at Wikimedia, following the departure of Lila Tretikov in 2016. Wikipedia is hosted and funded by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization which also operates Wikipedia-related projects such as Wiktionary and Wikibooks. The foundation relies on public contributions and grants to fund its mission.[227] The foundation's 2013 IRS Form 990 shows revenue of $39.7 million and expenses of almost $29 million, with assets of $37.2 million and liabilities of about $2.3 million.[228] In May 2014, Wikimedia Foundation named Lila Tretikov as its second executive director, taking over for Sue Gardner.[229] The Wall Street Journal reported on May 1, 2014, that Tretikov's information technology background from her years at University of California offers Wikipedia an opportunity to develop in more concentrated directions guided by her often repeated position statement that, "Information, like air, wants to be free."[230][231] The same Wall Street Journal article reported these directions of development according to an interview with spokesman Jay Walsh of Wikimedia, who "said Tretikov would address that issue (paid advocacy) as a priority. 'We are really pushing toward more transparency... We are reinforcing that paid advocacy is not welcome.' Initiatives to involve greater diversity of contributors, better mobile support of Wikipedia, new geo-location tools to find local content more easily, and more tools for users in the second and third world are also priorities, Walsh said."[230] Following the departure of Tretikov from Wikipedia due to issues concerning the use of the "superprotection" feature which some language versions of Wikipedia have adopted, Katherine Maher became the third executive director the Wikimedia Foundation in June 2016.[232] Maher has stated that one of her priorities would be the issue of editor harassment endemic to Wikipedia as identified by the Wikipedia board in December. Maher stated regarding the harassment issue that: "It establishes a sense within the community that this is a priority... (and that correction requires that) it has to be more than words."[233] Wikipedia is also supported by many organizations and groups that are affiliated with the Wikimedia Foundation but independently-run, called Wikimedia movement affiliates. These include Wikimedia chapters (which are national or sub-national organizations, such as Wikimedia Deutschland and Wikimédia France), thematic organizations (such as Amical Wikimedia for the Catalan language community), and user groups. These affiliates participate in the promotion, development, and funding of Wikipedia. Software operations and support See also: MediaWiki The operation of Wikipedia depends on MediaWiki, a custom-made, free and open source wiki software platform written in PHP and built upon the MySQL database system.[234] The software incorporates programming features such as a macro language, variables, a transclusion system for templates, and URL redirection. MediaWiki is licensed under the GNU General Public License and it is used by all Wikimedia projects, as well as many other wiki projects. Originally, Wikipedia ran on UseModWiki written in Perl by Clifford Adams (Phase I), which initially required CamelCase for article hyperlinks; the present double bracket style was incorporated later. Starting in January 2002 (Phase II), Wikipedia began running on a PHP wiki engine with a MySQL database; this software was custom-made for Wikipedia by Magnus Manske. The Phase II software was repeatedly modified to accommodate the exponentially increasing demand. In July 2002 (Phase III), Wikipedia shifted to the third-generation software, MediaWiki, originally written by Lee Daniel Crocker. Several MediaWiki extensions are installed[235] to extend the functionality of the MediaWiki software. In April 2005, a Lucene extension[236][237] was added to MediaWiki's built-in search and Wikipedia switched from MySQL to Lucene for searching. The site currently uses Lucene Search 2.1,[238][needs update] which is written in Java and based on Lucene library 2.3.[239] In July 2013, after extensive beta testing, a WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) extension, VisualEditor, was opened to public use.[240][241][242][243] It was met with much rejection and criticism, and was described as "slow and buggy".[244] The feature was changed from opt-out to opt-in afterward. Automated editing Computer programs called bots have been used widely to perform simple and repetitive tasks, such as correcting common misspellings and stylistic issues, or to start articles such as geography entries in a standard format from statistical data.[245][246][247] One controversial contributor massively creating articles with his bot was reported to create up to ten thousand articles on the Swedish Wikipedia on certain days.[248] There are also some bots designed to automatically notify editors when they make common editing errors (such as unmatched quotes or unmatched parenthesis).[249] Edits misidentified by a bot as the work of a banned editor can be restored by other editors. An anti-vandal bot tries to detect and revert vandalism quickly and automatically.[246] Bots can also report edits from particular accounts or IP address ranges, as was done at the time of the MH17 jet downing incident in July 2014.[250] Bots on Wikipedia must be approved prior to activation.[251] According to Andrew Lih, the current expansion of Wikipedia to millions of articles would be difficult to envision without the use of such bots.[252] Wikiprojects, and assessments of articles' importance and quality This section is transcluded from English Wikipedia. (edit | history) Main article: WikiProject A "WikiProject" is a group of contributors who want to work together as a team to improve Wikipedia. These groups often focus on a specific topic area (for example, women's history), a specific location or a specific kind of task (for example, checking newly created pages). The English Wikipedia currently has over 2,000 WikiProjects and activity varies.[253] In 2007, in preparation for producing a print version, the English Wikipedia introduced an assessment scale of the quality of articles.[254] Articles are rated by WikiProjects. The range of quality classes begins with "Stub" (very short pages), followed by "Start", "C" and "B" (in increasing order of quality). Community peer review is needed for the article to enter one of the highest quality classes: either "A", "good article" or the highest, "featured article". Of the about 4.4 million articles and lists assessed as of March 2015, a little more than 5,000 (0.12%) are featured articles, and fewer than 2,000 (0.04%) are featured lists. One featured article per day, as selected by editors, appears on the main page of Wikipedia.[255][256] The articles can also be rated as per "importance" as judged by a WikiProject. Currently, there are 5 importance categories: "low", "mid", "high", "top", and "???" for unclassified/uncertain level. For a particular article, different WikiProjects may assign different importance levels. The Wikipedia Version 1.0 Editorial Team has developed a table (shown below) that displays data of all rated articles by quality and importance, on the English Wikipedia. If an article or list receives different ratings by two or more WikiProjects, then the highest rating is used in the table, pie-charts, and bar-chart. The software regularly auto-updates the data. Researcher Giacomo Poderi found that articles tend to reach featured status via the intensive work of a few editors.[257] A 2010 study found unevenness in quality among featured articles and concluded that the community process is ineffective in assessing the quality of articles.[258] Quality-wise distribution of over 5.5 million articles and lists on the English Wikipedia, as of 29 January 2017[update][259]   Featured articles (0.11%)   Featured lists (0.04%)   A class (0.03%)   Good articles (0.50%)   B class (2.00%)   C class (4.32%)   Start class (26.41%)   Stub class (53.01%)   Lists (3.65%)   Unassessed (9.94%) Importance-wise distribution of over 5.5 million articles and lists on the English Wikipedia, as of 29 January 2017[update][259]   Top (0.91%)   High (3.20%)   Medium (12.21%)   Low (51.68%)   ??? (32.00%) All rated articles by quality and importance Quality Importance Top High Mid Low ??? Total FA 1,189 1,841 1,732 1,091 191 6,044 FL 142 567 670 600 120 2,099 A 224 430 580 372 79 1,685 GA 2,113 4,819 9,439 10,277 1,749 28,397 B 12,177 23,035 35,303 28,337 13,885 112,737 C 10,410 30,260 67,693 94,179 43,950 246,492 Start 17,315 76,691 308,832 802,184 295,178 1,500,200 Stub 4,247 30,928 228,127 1,887,219 844,350 2,994,871 List 3,062 11,393 34,727 94,961 62,202 206,345 Assessed 50,879 179,964 687,103 2,919,220 1,261,704 5,098,870 Unassessed 137 431 1,665 16,008 533,078 551,319 Total 51,016 180,395 688,768 2,935,228 1,794,782 5,650,189 500,000 1,000,000 1,500,000 2,000,000 2,500,000 3,000,000 Top High Medium Low ???   Featured articles   Featured lists   A-class articles   Good articles   B-class articles   C-class articles   Start-class articles   Stub articles   Lists   Unassessed articles and lists [Note: The table above (prepared by the Wikipedia Version 1.0 Editorial Team) is automatically updated daily by User:WP 1.0 bot, but the bar-chart and the two pie-charts are not auto-updated. In them, new data has to be entered by a Wikipedia editor (i.e. user).] Hardware operations and support See also: Wikimedia Foundation § Hardware Wikipedia receives between 25,000 and 60,000 page requests per second, depending on time of day.[260] As of 2008[update] page requests are first passed to a front-end layer of Squid caching servers.[261][needs update] Further statistics, based on a publicly available 3-month Wikipedia access trace, are available.[262] Requests that cannot be served from the Squid cache are sent to load-balancing servers running the Linux Virtual Server software, which in turn pass them to one of the Apache web servers for page rendering from the database. The web servers deliver pages as requested, performing page rendering for all the language editions of Wikipedia. To increase speed further, rendered pages are cached in a distributed memory cache until invalidated, allowing page rendering to be skipped entirely for most common page accesses. Overview of system architecture as of December 2010[update] Wikipedia currently runs on dedicated clusters of Linux servers (mainly Ubuntu).[263][264] As of December 2009[update], there were 300 in Florida and 44 in Amsterdam.[265] By January 22, 2013, Wikipedia had migrated its primary data center to an Equinix facility in Ashburn, Virginia.[266][267] Internal research and operational development In accordance with growing amounts of incoming donations exceeding seven digits in 2013 as recently reported,[50] the Foundation has reached a threshold of assets which qualify its consideration under the principles of industrial organization economics to indicate the need for the re-investment of donations into the internal research and development of the Foundation.[268] Two of the recent projects of such internal research and development have been the creation of a Visual Editor and a largely under-utilized "Thank" tab which were developed for the purpose of ameliorating issues of editor attrition, which have met with limited success.[50][244] The estimates for reinvestment by industrial organizations into internal research and development was studied by Adam Jaffe, who recorded that the range of 4% to 25% annually was to be recommended, with high end technology requiring the higher level of support for internal reinvestment.[269] At the 2013 level of contributions for Wikimedia presently documented as 45 million dollars, the computed budget level recommended by Jaffe and Caballero for reinvestment into internal research and development is between 1.8 million and 11.3 million dollars annually.[269] In 2016, the level of contributions were reported by Blomberg News as being at $77 million annually, updating the Jaffe estimates for the higher level of support to between 3.08 million and 19.2 million dollars annually.[269] Internal news publications Community-produced news publications include the English Wikipedia's The Signpost, founded in 2005 by Michael Snow, an attorney, Wikipedia administrator and former chair of the Wikimedia Foundation board of trustees.[270] It covers news and events from the site, as well as major events from other Wikimedia projects, such as Wikimedia Commons. Similar publications are the German-language Kurier, and the Portuguese-language Correio da Wikipédia. Other past and present community news publications on English Wikipedia include the "Wikiworld" web comic, the Wikipedia Weekly podcast, and newsletters of specific WikiProjects like The Bugle from WikiProject Military History and the monthly newsletter from The Guild of Copy Editors. There are also a number of publications from the Wikimedia Foundation and multilingual publications such as the Wikimedia Blog and This Month in Education. Access to content Content licensing When the project was started in 2001, all text in Wikipedia was covered by the GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL), a copyleft license permitting the redistribution, creation of derivative works, and commercial use of content while authors retain copyright of their work.[271] The GFDL was created for software manuals that come with free software programs licensed under the GPL. This made it a poor choice for a general reference work: for example, the GFDL requires the reprints of materials from Wikipedia to come with a full copy of the GFDL text. In December 2002, the Creative Commons license was released: it was specifically designed for creative works in general, not just for software manuals. The license gained popularity among bloggers and others distributing creative works on the Web. The Wikipedia project sought the switch to the Creative Commons.[272] Because the two licenses, GFDL and Creative Commons, were incompatible, in November 2008, following the request of the project, the Free Software Foundation (FSF) released a new version of the GFDL designed specifically to allow Wikipedia to relicense its content to CC BY-SA by August 1, 2009. (A new version of the GFDL automatically covers Wikipedia contents.) In April 2009, Wikipedia and its sister projects held a community-wide referendum which decided the switch in June 2009.[273][274][275][276] The handling of media files (e.g. image files) varies across language editions. Some language editions, such as the English Wikipedia, include non-free image files under fair use doctrine, while the others have opted not to, in part because of the lack of fair use doctrines in their home countries (e.g. in Japanese copyright law). Media files covered by free content licenses (e.g. Creative Commons' CC BY-SA) are shared across language editions via Wikimedia Commons repository, a project operated by the Wikimedia Foundation. Wikipedia's accommodation of varying international copyright laws regarding images has led some to observe that its photographic coverage of topics lags behind the quality of the encyclopedic text.[277] The Wikimedia Foundation is not a licensor of content, but merely a hosting service for the contributors (and licensors) of the Wikipedia. This position has been successfully defended in court.[278][279] Methods of access Because Wikipedia content is distributed under an open license, anyone can reuse or re-distribute it at no charge. The content of Wikipedia has been published in many forms, both online and offline, outside of the Wikipedia website. Websites – Thousands of "mirror sites" exist that republish content from Wikipedia: two prominent ones, that also include content from other reference sources, are Reference.com and Answers.com. Another example is Wapedia, which began to display Wikipedia content in a mobile-device-friendly format before Wikipedia itself did. Mobile apps – A variety of mobile apps provide access to Wikipedia on hand-held devices, including both Android and iOS devices (see Wikipedia apps). (See also Mobile access.) Search engines – Some web search engines make special use of Wikipedia content when displaying search results: examples include Bing (via technology gained from Powerset)[280] and DuckDuckGo. Compact discs, DVDs – Collections of Wikipedia articles have been published on optical discs. An English version, 2006 Wikipedia CD Selection, contained about 2,000 articles.[281][282] The Polish-language version contains nearly 240,000 articles.[283] There are German- and Spanish-language versions as well.[284][285] Also, "Wikipedia for Schools", the Wikipedia series of CDs / DVDs produced by Wikipedians and SOS Children, is a free, hand-checked, non-commercial selection from Wikipedia targeted around the UK National Curriculum and intended to be useful for much of the English-speaking world.[286] The project is available online; an equivalent print encyclopedia would require roughly 20 volumes. Printed books – There are efforts to put a select subset of Wikipedia's articles into printed book form.[287][288] Since 2009, tens of thousands of print-on-demand books that reproduced English, German, Russian and French Wikipedia articles have been produced by the American company Books LLC and by three Mauritian subsidiaries of the German publisher VDM.[289] Semantic Web – The website DBpedia, begun in 2007, extracts data from the infoboxes and category declarations of the English-language Wikipedia. Wikimedia has created the Wikidata project with a similar objective of storing the basic facts from each page of Wikipedia and the other WMF wikis and make it available in a queriable semantic format, RDF. This is still under development. As of Feb 2014 it has 15,000,000 items and 1,000 properties for describing them. Obtaining the full contents of Wikipedia for reuse presents challenges, since direct cloning via a web crawler is discouraged.[290] Wikipedia publishes "dumps" of its contents, but these are text-only; as of 2007[update] there was no dump available of Wikipedia's images.[291] Several languages of Wikipedia also maintain a reference desk, where volunteers answer questions from the general public. According to a study by Pnina Shachaf in the Journal of Documentation, the quality of the Wikipedia reference desk is comparable to a standard library reference desk, with an accuracy of 55%.[292] Mobile access See also: Help:Mobile access The mobile version of the English Wikipedia's main page Wikipedia's original medium was for users to read and edit content using any standard web browser through a fixed Internet connection. Although Wikipedia content has been accessible through the mobile web since July 2013, The New York Times on February 9, 2014, quoted Erik Möller, deputy director of the Wikimedia Foundation, stating that the transition of internet traffic from desktops to mobile devices was significant and a cause for concern and worry.[16] The article in The New York Times reported the comparison statistics for mobile edits stating that, "Only 20 percent of the readership of the English-language Wikipedia comes via mobile devices, a figure substantially lower than the percentage of mobile traffic for other media sites, many of which approach 50 percent. And the shift to mobile editing has lagged even more."[16] The New York Times reports that Möller has assigned "a team of 10 software developers focused on mobile", out of a total of approximately 200 employees working at the Wikimedia Foundation. One principal concern cited by The New York Times for the "worry" is for Wikipedia to effectively address attrition issues with the number of editors which the online encyclopedia attracts to edit and maintain its content in a mobile access environment.[16] Bloomberg Businessweek reported in July 2014 that Google's Android mobile apps have dominated the largest share of global smartphone shipments for 2013 with 78.6% of market share over their next closest competitor in iOS with 15.2% of the market.[293] At the time of the Tretikov appointment and her posted web interview with Sue Gardner in May 2014, Wikimedia representatives made a technical announcement concerning the number of mobile access systems in the market seeking access to Wikipedia. Directly after the posted web interview, the representatives stated that Wikimedia would be applying an all-inclusive approach to accommodate as many mobile access systems as possible in its efforts for expanding general mobile access, including BlackBerry and the Windows Phone system, making market share a secondary issue.[231] The latest version of the Android app for Wikipedia was released on July 23, 2014, to generally positive reviews, scoring over four of a possible five in a poll of approximately 200,000 users downloading from Google.[294] The latest version for iOS was released on April 3, 2013, to similar reviews.[295] Access to Wikipedia from mobile phones was possible as early as 2004, through the Wireless Application Protocol (WAP), via the Wapedia service. In June 2007 Wikipedia launched en.mobile.wikipedia.org, an official website for wireless devices. In 2009 a newer mobile service was officially released,[296] located at en.m.wikipedia.org, which caters to more advanced mobile devices such as the iPhone, Android-based devices or WebOS-based devices. Several other methods of mobile access to Wikipedia have emerged. Many devices and applications optimize or enhance the display of Wikipedia content for mobile devices, while some also incorporate additional features such as use of Wikipedia metadata (See Wikipedia:Metadata), such as geoinformation.[297][298] Wikipedia Zero is an initiative of the Wikimedia Foundation to expand the reach of the encyclopedia to the developing countries.[299] Andrew Lih and Andrew Brown both maintain editing Wikipedia with smart phones is difficult and this discourages new potential contributors. Several years running the number of Wikipedia editors has been falling and Tom Simonite of MIT Technology Review claims the bureaucratic structure and rules are a factor in this. Simonite alleges some Wikipedians use the labyrinthine rules and guidelines to dominate others and those editors have a vested interest in keeping the status quo.[50] Lih alleges there is serious disagreement among existing contributors how to resolve this. Lih fears for Wikipedia's long term future while Brown fears problems with Wikipedia will remain and rival encyclopedias will not replace it.[300][301] Cultural impact Readership Wikipedia is extremely popular. In February 2014, The New York Times reported that Wikipedia is ranked fifth globally among all websites, stating "With 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors a month […] Wikipedia trails just Yahoo, Facebook, Microsoft and Google, the largest with 1.2 billion unique visitors."[16] In addition to logistic growth in the number of its articles,[302] Wikipedia has steadily gained status as a general reference website since its inception in 2001.[303] About 50% of search engine traffic to Wikipedia comes from Google,[304] a good portion of which is related to academic research.[305] The number of readers of Wikipedia worldwide reached 365 million at the end of 2009.[306] The Pew Internet and American Life project found that one third of US Internet users consulted Wikipedia.[307] In 2011 Business Insider gave Wikipedia a valuation of $4 billion if it ran advertisements.[308] According to "Wikipedia Readership Survey 2011", the average age of Wikipedia readers is 36, with a rough parity between genders. Almost half of Wikipedia readers visit the site more than five times a month, and a similar number of readers specifically look for Wikipedia in search engine results. About 47% of Wikipedia readers do not realize that Wikipedia is a non-profit organization.[309] Cultural significance Main article: Wikipedia in culture Wikipedia Monument in S?ubice, Poland Wikipedia's content has also been used in academic studies, books, conferences, and court cases.[310][311][312] The Parliament of Canada's website refers to Wikipedia's article on same-sex marriage in the "related links" section of its "further reading" list for the Civil Marriage Act.[313] The encyclopedia's assertions are increasingly used as a source by organizations such as the US federal courts and the World Intellectual Property Organization[314] – though mainly for supporting information rather than information decisive to a case.[315] Content appearing on Wikipedia has also been cited as a source and referenced in some US intelligence agency reports.[316] In December 2008, the scientific journal RNA Biology launched a new section for descriptions of families of RNA molecules and requires authors who contribute to the section to also submit a draft article on the RNA family for publication in Wikipedia.[317] Wikipedia has also been used as a source in journalism,[318][319] often without attribution, and several reporters have been dismissed for plagiarizing from Wikipedia.[320][321][322] In 2006, Time magazine recognized Wikipedia's participation (along with YouTube, Reddit, MySpace, and Facebook[323]) in the rapid growth of online collaboration and interaction by millions of people worldwide. In July 2007 Wikipedia was the focus of a 30-minute documentary on BBC Radio 4[324] which argued that, with increased usage and awareness, the number of references to Wikipedia in popular culture is such that the word is one of a select band of 21st-century nouns that are so familiar (Google, Facebook, YouTube) that they no longer need explanation. On September 28, 2007, Italian politician Franco Grillini raised a parliamentary question with the minister of cultural resources and activities about the necessity of freedom of panorama. He said that the lack of such freedom forced Wikipedia, "the seventh most consulted website", to forbid all images of modern Italian buildings and art, and claimed this was hugely damaging to tourist revenues.[325] Play media Wikipedia, an introduction – Erasmus Prize 2015 Jimmy Wales receiving the Quadriga A Mission of Enlightenment award On September 16, 2007, The Washington Post reported that Wikipedia had become a focal point in the 2008 US election campaign, saying: "Type a candidate's name into Google, and among the first results is a Wikipedia page, making those entries arguably as important as any ad in defining a candidate. Already, the presidential entries are being edited, dissected and debated countless times each day."[326] An October 2007 Reuters article, titled "Wikipedia page the latest status symbol", reported the recent phenomenon of how having a Wikipedia article vindicates one's notability.[327] Active participation also has an impact. Law students have been assigned to write Wikipedia articles as an exercise in clear and succinct writing for an uninitiated audience.[328] A working group led by Peter Stone (formed as a part of the Stanford-based project One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence) in its report called Wikipedia "the best-known example of crowdsourcing... that far exceeds traditionally-compiled information sources, such as encyclopedias and dictionaries, in scale and depth."[329] Awards Wikipedia team visiting to Parliament of Asturias Wikipedians meeting after the Asturias awards ceremony Wikipedia won two major awards in May 2004.[330] The first was a Golden Nica for Digital Communities of the annual Prix Ars Electronica contest; this came with a €10,000 (£6,588; $12,700) grant and an invitation to present at the PAE Cyberarts Festival in Austria later that year. The second was a Judges' Webby Award for the "community" category.[331] Wikipedia was also nominated for a "Best Practices" Webby award. In 2007, readers of brandchannel.com voted Wikipedia as the fourth-highest brand ranking, receiving 15% of the votes in answer to the question "Which brand had the most impact on our lives in 2006?"[332] In September 2008, Wikipedia received Quadriga A Mission of Enlightenment award of Werkstatt Deutschland along with Boris Tadi?, Eckart Höfling, and Peter Gabriel. The award was presented to Wales by David Weinberger.[333] In 2015, Wikipedia was awarded both the annual Erasmus Prize, which recognizes exceptional contributions to culture, society or social sciences,[334] and the Spanish Princess of Asturias Award on International Cooperation.[335] Speaking at the Asturian Parliament in Oviedo, the city that hosts the awards ceremony, Jimmy Wales praised the work of the Asturian language Wikipedia users.[336] The night of the ceremony, members of the Wikimedia Foundation held a meeting with Wikipedians from all parts of Spain, including the local Asturian community. Satire See also: Category:Parodies of Wikipedia. Many parodies target Wikipedia's openness and susceptibility to inserted inaccuracies, with characters vandalizing or modifying the online encyclopedia project's articles. Comedian Stephen Colbert has parodied or referenced Wikipedia on numerous episodes of his show The Colbert Report and coined the related term wikiality, meaning "together we can create a reality that we all agree on—the reality we just agreed on".[177] Another example can be found in "Wikipedia Celebrates 750 Years of American Independence", a July 2006 front-page article in The Onion,[337] as well as the 2010 The Onion article "'L.A. Law' Wikipedia Page Viewed 874 Times Today".[338] In an episode of the television comedy The Office U.S., which aired in April 2007, an incompetent office manager (Michael Scott) is shown relying on a hypothetical Wikipedia article for information on negotiation tactics in order to assist him in negotiating lesser pay for an employee.[339] The tactics he used failed, as a joke about the unreliability of Wikipedia and what anyone can do to change its contents. Viewers of the show tried to add the episode's mention of the page as a section of the actual Wikipedia article on negotiation, but this effort was prevented by other users on the article's talk page.[340] "My Number One Doctor", a 2007 episode of the television show Scrubs, played on the perception that Wikipedia is an unreliable reference tool with a scene in which Dr. Perry Cox reacts to a patient who says that a Wikipedia article indicates that the raw food diet reverses the effects of bone cancer by retorting that the same editor who wrote that article also wrote the Battlestar Galactica episode guide.[341] In 2008, the comedic website CollegeHumor produced a video sketch named "Professor Wikipedia", in which the fictitious Professor Wikipedia instructs a class with a medley of unverifiable and occasionally absurd statements.[342] The Dilbert comic strip from May 8, 2009, features a character supporting an improbable claim by saying "Give me ten minutes and then check Wikipedia."[343] In July 2009, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a comedy series called Bigipedia, which was set on a website which was a parody of Wikipedia. Some of the sketches were directly inspired by Wikipedia and its articles.[344] In 2010, comedian Daniel Tosh encouraged viewers of his show, Tosh.0, to visit the show's Wikipedia article and edit it at will. On a later episode, he commented on the edits to the article, most of them offensive, which had been made by the audience and had prompted the article to be locked from editing.[345][346] On August 23, 2013, the New Yorker website published a cartoon with this caption: "Dammit, Manning, have you considered the pronoun war that this is going to start on your Wikipedia page?"[347] In December 2015, John Julius Norwich stated, in a letter published in The Times newspaper, that as an historian he resorted to Wikipedia "at least a dozen times a day", and had never yet caught it out. He described it as "a work of reference as useful as any in existence", with so wide a range that it is almost impossible to find a person, place or thing that it has left uncovered, and that he could never have written his last two books without it.[348][349] Sister projects – Wikimedia Main article: Wikimedia project Wikipedia has also spawned several sister projects, which are also wikis run by the Wikimedia Foundation. These other Wikimedia projects include Wiktionary, a dictionary project launched in December 2002,[350] Wikiquote, a collection of quotations created a week after Wikimedia launched, Wikibooks, a collection of collaboratively written free textbooks and annotated texts, Wikimedia Commons, a site devoted to free-knowledge multimedia, Wikinews, for citizen journalism, and Wikiversity, a project for the creation of free learning materials and the provision of online learning activities.[351] Of these, only Commons has had success comparable to that of Wikipedia. Another sister project of Wikipedia, Wikispecies, is a catalogue of species. In 2012 Wikivoyage, an editable travel guide, and Wikidata, an editable knowledge base, launched. Publishing A group of Wikimedians of the Wikimedia DC chapter at the 2013 DC Wikimedia annual meeting standing in front of the Encyclopædia Britannica (back left) at the US National Archives The most obvious economic effect of Wikipedia has been the death of commercial encyclopedias, especially the printed versions, e.g. Encyclopædia Britannica, which were unable to compete with a product that is essentially free.[352][353][354] Nicholas Carr wrote a 2005 essay, "The amorality of Web 2.0", that criticized websites with user-generated content, like Wikipedia, for possibly leading to professional (and, in his view, superior) content producers' going out of business, because "free trumps quality all the time". Carr wrote: "Implicit in the ecstatic visions of Web 2.0 is the hegemony of the amateur. I for one can't imagine anything more frightening."[355] Others dispute the notion that Wikipedia, or similar efforts, will entirely displace traditional publications. For instance, Chris Anderson, the editor-in-chief of Wired Magazine, wrote in Nature that the "wisdom of crowds" approach of Wikipedia will not displace top scientific journals, with their rigorous peer review process.[356] There is also an ongoing debate about the influence of Wikipedia on the biography publishing business. "The worry is that, if you can get all that information from Wikipedia, what's left for biography?" said Kathryn Hughes, professor of life writing at UEA and author of The Short Life and Long Times of Mrs Beeton and George Eliot: the Last Victorian.[357] Scientific use Wikipedia has seen been widely used as a corpus for linguistic research in computational linguistics, information retrieval and natural language processing. In particular, it commonly serves as a target knowledge base for the entity linking problem, which is then called "wikification",[358] and to the related problem of word sense disambiguation.[359] Methods similar to wikification can in turn be used to find "missing" links in Wikipedia.[360] In 2015, French researchers Dr José Lages of the University of Franche-Comté in Besançon and Dima Shepelyansky of Paul Sabatier University in Toulouse published a global university ranking based on Wikipedia scholarly citations.[361][362][363] They used PageRank "followed by the number of appearances in the 24 different language editions of Wikipedia (descending order) and the century in which they were founded (ascending order)."[363] Related projects A number of interactive multimedia encyclopedias incorporating entries written by the public existed long before Wikipedia was founded. The first of these was the 1986 BBC Domesday Project, which included text (entered on BBC Micro computers) and photographs from over 1 million contributors in the UK, and covered the geography, art, and culture of the UK. This was the first interactive multimedia encyclopedia (and was also the first major multimedia document connected through internal links), with the majority of articles being accessible through an interactive map of the UK. The user interface and part of the content of the Domesday Project were emulated on a website until 2008.[364] Several free-content, collaborative encyclopedias were created around the same period as Wikipedia (e.g. Everything2),[365] with many later being merged into the project (e.g. GNE).[366] One of the most successful early online encyclopedias incorporating entries by the public was h2g2, which was created by Douglas Adams in 1999. The h2g2 encyclopedia is relatively light-hearted, focusing on articles which are both witty and informative. Subsequent collaborative knowledge websites have drawn inspiration from Wikipedia. Some, such as Susning.nu, Enciclopedia Libre, Hudong, and Baidu Baike likewise employ no formal review process, although some like Conservapedia are not as open. Others use more traditional peer review, such as Encyclopedia of Life and the online wiki encyclopedias Scholarpedia and Citizendium. The latter was started by Sanger in an attempt to create a reliable alternative to Wikipedia.[367][368] See also Internet portal Outline of Wikipedia – guide to the subject of Wikipedia presented as a tree structured list of its subtopics; for an outline of the contents of Wikipedia, see Portal:Contents/Outlines Conflict-of-interest editing on Wikipedia Democratization of knowledge Interpedia, an early proposal for a collaborative Internet encyclopedia List of Internet encyclopedias Network effect Print Wikipedia art project to visualize how big Wikipedia is. In cooperation with Wikimedia foundation. QRpedia – multilingual, mobile interface to Wikipedia Wikipedia Review References ^ Sidener, Jonathan (December 6, 2004). "Everyone's Encyclopedia". U-T San Diego. Archived from the original on January 14, 2016. Retrieved October 15, 2006.  ^ Roger Chapman. "Top 40 Website Programming Languages". roadchap.com. Archived from the original on September 22, 2013. Retrieved September 6, 2011.  CS1 maint: Unfit url (link) ^ "Wikipedia founder defends decision to encrypt the site in China". The Verge. Retrieved September 19, 2015.  ^ Bill Tancer (May 1, 2007). "Look Who's Using Wikipedia". Time. Retrieved December 1, 2007. The sheer volume of content […] is partly responsible for the site's dominance as an online reference. When compared to the top 3,200 educational reference sites in the US, Wikipedia is No. 1, capturing 24.3% of all visits to the category . Cf. Bill Tancer (Global Manager, Hitwise), "Wikipedia, Search and School Homework" Archived March 25, 2012, at the Wayback Machine., Hitwise, March 1, 2007. ^ Alex Woodson (July 8, 2007). "Wikipedia remains go-to site for online news". Reuters. Retrieved December 16, 2007. Online encyclopedia Wikipedia has added about 20 million unique monthly visitors in the past year, making it the top online news and information destination, according to Nielsen//NetRatings.  ^ "comScore MMX Ranks Top 50 US Web Properties for August 2012". comScore. September 12, 2012. Retrieved February 6, 2013.  ^ a b c "How popular is wikipedia.org?". Alexa Internet. May 22, 2016. Retrieved September 4, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia pornography row deepens as Wales cedes rights – BBC News". BBC. Retrieved June 28, 2016.  ^ "The Mysterious Workings of Wikis: Who Owns What?". Ecommercetimes.com. Retrieved June 28, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation employee ousted over paid editing". Ars Technica. Retrieved June 28, 2016.  ^ a b Kock, N., Jung, Y., & Syn, T. (2016). Wikipedia and e-Collaboration Research: Opportunities and Challenges. Archived September 27, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. International Journal of e-Collaboration (IJeC), 12(2), 1–8. ^ Mike Miliard (March 1, 2008). "Wikipediots: Who Are These Devoted, Even Obsessive Contributors to Wikipedia?". Salt Lake City Weekly. Retrieved December 18, 2008.  ^ Sidener, Jonathan (October 9, 2006). "Wikipedia family feud rooted in San Diego". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Archived from the original on November 11, 2016. Retrieved May 5, 2009.  ^ "Wiki" in the Hawaiian Dictionary, revised and enlarged edition, University of Hawaii Press, 1986 ^ "Wikipedia cofounder Jimmy Wales on 60 Minutes". CBS News. Retrieved April 6, 2015.  ^ a b c d e f Cohen, Noam (February 9, 2014). "Wikipedia vs. the Small Screen". The New York Times.  ^ "Comparing featured article groups and revision patterns correlations in Wikipedia". First Monday. Retrieved July 13, 2010.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin Wattenberg; Matthew M. McKeon (July 22, 2007). "The Hidden Order of Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved October 30, 2007.  ^ a b Jim Giles (December 2005). "Internet encyclopedias go head to head". Nature. 438 (7070): 900–901. Bibcode:2005Natur.438..900G. doi:10.1038/438900a. PMID 16355180. (subscription required) Note: The study was cited in several news articles; e.g.: "Wikipedia survives research test". BBC News. December 15, 2005.  ^ a b c Black, Edwin (April 19, 2010) Wikipedia – The Dumbing Down of World Knowledge Archived September 9, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., History News Network Retrieved October 21, 2014 ^ a b J. Petrilli, Michael (SPRING 2008/Vol.8, No.2) Wikipedia or Wickedpedia? Archived November 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., Education Next Retrieved October 22, 2014 ^ "The contribution conundrum: Why did Wikipedia succeed while other encyclopedias failed?". Nieman Lab. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Richard M. Stallman (June 20, 2007). "The Free Encyclopedia Project". Free Software Foundation. Retrieved January 4, 2008.  ^ Jonathan Sidener (December 6, 2004). "Everyone's Encyclopedia". U-T San Diego. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved October 15, 2006.  ^ Meyers, Peter (September 20, 2001). "Fact-Driven? Collegial? This Site Wants You". The New York Times. Retrieved November 22, 2007. 'I can start an article that will consist of one paragraph, and then a real expert will come along and add three paragraphs and clean up my one paragraph,' said Larry Sanger of Las Vegas, who founded Wikipedia with Mr. Wales.  ^ a b c Sanger, Larry (April 18, 2005). "The Early History of Nupedia and Wikipedia: A Memoir". Slashdot. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Sanger, Larry (January 17, 2001). "Wikipedia Is Up!". Archived from the original on May 6, 2001. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia-l: LinkBacks?". Retrieved February 20, 2007.  ^ Sanger, Larry (January 10, 2001). "Let's Make a Wiki". Internet Archive. Archived from the original on April 14, 2003. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia: HomePage". Archived from the original on March 31, 2001. Retrieved March 31, 2001.  ^ "Wikipedia:Neutral point of view, Wikipedia (January 21, 2007). ^ Finkelstein, Seth (September 25, 2008). "Read me first: Wikipedia isn't about human potential, whatever Wales says". London: The Guardian.  ^ "Wikipedia, August 8, 2001". Web.archive.bibalex.org. August 8, 2001. Archived from the original on July 27, 2001. Retrieved March 3, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia, September 25, 2001". Web.archive.bibalex.org. Archived from the original on March 31, 2001. Retrieved March 3, 2014.  ^ "Multilingual statistics". Wikipedia. March 30, 2005. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Encyclopedias and Dictionaries". Encyclopædia Britannica. 18 (15th ed.). 2007. pp. 257–286.  ^ "[long] Enciclopedia Libre: msg#00008". Osdir. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Clay Shirky (February 28, 2008). Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing Without Organizations. The Penguin Press via Amazon Online Reader. p. 273. ISBN 1-59420-153-6. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Bobbie Johnson (August 12, 2009). "Wikipedia approaches its limits". The Guardian. London. Retrieved March 31, 2010.  ^ Wikipedia:Modelling_Wikipedia_extended_growth ^ The Singularity is Not Near: Slowing Growth of Wikipedia (PDF). The International Symposium on Wikis. Orlando, Florida. 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 11, 2011.  ^ Evgeny Morozov (November–December 2009). "Edit This Page; Is it the end of Wikipedia". Boston Review.  ^ Cohen, Noam (March 28, 2009). "Wikipedia – Exploring Fact City". The New York Times. Retrieved April 19, 2011.  ^ Austin Gibbons, David Vetrano, Susan Biancani (2012). Wikipedia: Nowhere to grow ^ Jenny Kleeman (November 26, 2009). "Wikipedia falling victim to a war of words". The Guardian. London. Retrieved March 31, 2010.  ^ "Wikipedia: A quantitative analysis". Archived from the original (PDF) on April 3, 2012.  ^ Volunteers Log Off as Wikipedia Ages, The Wall Street Journal, November 27, 2009. ^ Barnett, Emma (November 26, 2009). "Wikipedia's Jimmy Wales denies site is 'losing' thousands of volunteer editors". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved March 31, 2010.  ^ a b Kevin Rawlinson (August 8, 2011). "Wikipedia seeks women to balance its 'geeky' editors". The Independent. Retrieved April 5, 2012.  ^ a b c d e Simonite, Tom (October 22, 2013). "The Decline of Wikipedia". MIT Technology Review. Retrieved November 30, 2013.  ^ "3 Charts That Show How Wikipedia Is Running Out of Admins". The Atlantic. July 16, 2012.  ^ Ward, Katherine. New York Magazine, issue of November 25, 2013, p. 18. ^ "Wikipedia Breaks Into US Top 10 Sites". PCWorld. February 17, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedia.org Site Overview". alexa.com. Retrieved December 4, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia Traffic Analysis Report – Wikipedia Page Views Per Country". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 8, 2015.  ^ Netburn, Deborah (January 19, 2012). "Wikipedia: SOPA protest led 8 million to look up reps in Congress". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved March 6, 2012.  ^ "Wikipedia joins blackout protest at US anti-piracy moves". BBC News. January 18, 2012. Retrieved January 19, 2012.  ^ "SOPA/Blackoutpage". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved January 19, 2012.  ^ Jeff Loveland and Joseph Reagle (January 15, 2013). "Wikipedia and encyclopedic production. New Media & Society. Sage Journals". New Media & Society. 15 (8): 1294. doi:10.1177/1461444812470428.  ^ Rebecca J. Rosen (January 30, 2013). "What If the Great Wikipedia 'Revolution' Was Actually a Reversion? • The Atlantic". Retrieved February 9, 2013.  ^ a b c Varma, Subodh (January 20, 2014). "Google eating into Wikipedia page views?". The Economic Times. Times Internet Limited. Retrieved February 10, 2014.  ^ "Alexa Top 500 Global Sites". Alexa Internet. Retrieved December 28, 2016.  ^ a b "Wikipedia Statistics (English)". stats.wikimedia.org.  ^ a b Zittrain, Jonathan (2008). The Future of the Internet and How to Stop It – Chapter 6: The Lessons of Wikipedia. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-12487-3. Archived from the original on February 16, 2009. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Registration notes ^ Protection Policy ^ Hafner, Katie (June 17, 2006). "Growing Wikipedia Refines Its 'Anyone Can Edit' Policy". The New York Times. Retrieved December 5, 2016.  ^ English Wikipedia's protection policy ^ English Wikipedia's full protection policy ^ a b Birken, P. (December 14, 2008). "Bericht Gesichtete Versionen". Wikide-l (Mailing list) (in German). Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved February 15, 2009.  ^ William Henderson (December 10, 2012). "Wikipedia Has Figured Out A New Way To Stop Vandals In Their Tracks". Business Insider.  ^ Frewin, Jonathan (June 15, 2010). "Wikipedia unlocks divisive pages for editing". BBC News. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ a b Kleinz, Torsten (February 2005). "World of Knowledge" (PDF). Linux Magazine. Retrieved July 13, 2007. The Wikipedia's open structure makes it a target for trolls and vandals who malevolently add incorrect information to articles, get other people tied up in endless discussions, and generally do everything to draw attention to themselves.  ^ Wikipedia:New pages patrol ^ Andrea Ciffolilli, "Phantom authority, self-selective recruitment and retention of members in virtual communities: The case of Wikipedia" Archived December 6, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., First Monday December 2003. ^ West, Andrew G.; Chang, Jian; Venkatasubramanian, Krishna; Sokolsky, Oleg; Lee, Insup (2011). Link Spamming Wikipedia for Profit. 8th Annual Collaboration, Electronic Messaging, Anti-Abuse, and Spam Conference. pp. 152–161. doi:10.1145/2030376.2030394.  ^ Vandalism. Wikipedia. Retrieved November 6, 2012. ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin Wattenberg; Kushal Dave (2004). "Studying Cooperation and Conflict between Authors with History Flow Visualizations" (PDF). Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI). Vienna, Austria: ACM SIGCHI: 575–582. doi:10.1145/985921.985953. ISBN 1-58113-702-8. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 25, 2006. Retrieved January 24, 2007.  ^ Reid Priedhorsky; Jilin Chen; Shyong (Tony) K. Lam; Katherine Panciera; Loren Terveen; John Riedl (November 4, 2007). "Creating, Destroying, and Restoring Value in Wikipedia" (PDF). Association for Computing Machinery GROUP '07 conference proceedings; GroupLens Research, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota. Sanibel Island, Florida. Retrieved October 13, 2007.  ^ a b c d Seigenthaler, John (November 29, 2005). "A False Wikipedia 'biography'". USA Today. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Friedman, Thomas L. (2007). The World is Flat. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. p. 124. ISBN 978-0-374-29278-2.  ^ Buchanan, Brian (November 17, 2006). "Founder shares cautionary tale of libel in cyberspace". archive.firstamendmentcenter.org. Archived from the original on December 21, 2012. Retrieved November 17, 2012.  ^ Helm, Burt (December 13, 2005). "Wikipedia: "A Work in Progress"". BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012. Retrieved July 26, 2012.  ^ "Who's behind Wikipedia?". PC World. February 6, 2008. Archived from the original on February 9, 2008. Retrieved February 7, 2008.  ^ What Wikipedia is not. Retrieved April 1, 2010. "Wikipedia is not a dictionary, usage, or jargon guide." ^ Notability. Retrieved February 13, 2008. "A topic is presumed to be notable if it has received significant coverage in reliable secondary sources that are independent of the subject." ^ No original research. February 13, 2008. "Wikipedia does not publish original thought." ^ Verifiability. February 13, 2008. "Material challenged or likely to be challenged, and all quotations, must be attributed to a reliable, published source." ^ Cohen, Noam (August 9, 2011). "For inclusive mission, Wikipedia is told that written word goes only so far". International Herald Tribune. p. 18. Archived from the original on March 11, 2014 – via vLex. (subscription required) ^ Neutral point of view. February 13, 2008. "All Wikipedia articles and other encyclopedic content must be written from a neutral point of view, representing significant views fairly, proportionately and without bias." ^ Eric Haas (October 26, 2007). "Will Unethical Editing Destroy Wikipedia's Credibility?". AlterNet. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Sanger, Larry (April 18, 2005). "The Early History of Nupedia and Wikipedia: A Memoir". Slashdot. Dice.  ^ Kostakis, Vasilis (March 2010). "Identifying and understanding the problems of Wikipedia's peer governance: The case of inclusionists versus deletionists". First Monday.  ^ Ownership of articles ^ Avoiding Tragedy in the Wiki-Commons, by Andrew George, 12 Va. J.L. & Tech. 8 (2007) ^ Wikipedia:Administrators ^ Mehegan, David (February 13, 2006). "Many contributors, common cause". Boston Globe. Retrieved March 25, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedia:Administrators". Retrieved July 12, 2009.  ^ "Wikipedia:RfA_Review/Reflect". Retrieved September 24, 2009.  ^ Meyer, Robinson (July 16, 2012). "3 Charts That Show How Wikipedia Is Running Out of Admins". The Atlantic. Retrieved September 2, 2012.  ^ Dispute Resolution ^ Coldewey, Devin (June 21, 2012). "Wikipedia is editorial warzone, says study". Technology. NBC News. Retrieved October 29, 2012.  ^ David A. Hoffman; Salil K. Mehra (2009). "Wikitruth through Wikiorder". Emory Law Journal (PDF)|format= requires |url= (help). Emory University School of Law. 59 (1): 181. SSRN 1354424.  ^ David A. Hoffman; Salil K. Mehra (2009). "Wikitruth through Wikiorder". Emory Law Journal (PDF)|format= requires |url= (help). Emory University School of Law. 59 (1): 151–210. SSRN 1354424.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin M. Wattenberg; Jesse Kriss; Frank van Ham (January 3, 2007). "Talk Before You Type: Coordination in Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved June 27, 2008.  ^ Arthur, Charles (December 15, 2005). "Log on and join in, but beware the web cults". The Guardian. London. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Lu Stout, Kristie (August 4, 2003). "Wikipedia: The know-it-all Web site". CNN. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Larry Sanger (December 31, 2004). "Why Wikipedia Must Jettison Its Anti-Elitism". Kuro5hin, Op–Ed. There is a certain mindset associated with unmoderated Usenet groups […] that infects the collectively-managed Wikipedia project: if you react strongly to trolling, that reflects poorly on you, not (necessarily) on the troll. If you […] demand that something be done about constant disruption by trollish behavior, the other listmembers will cry "censorship", attack you, and even come to the defense of the troll. […] The root problem: anti-elitism, or lack of respect for expertise. There is a deeper problem […] which explains both of the above-elaborated problems. Namely, as a community, Wikipedia lacks the habit or tradition of respect for expertise. As a community, far from being elitist, it is anti-elitist (which, in this context, means that expertise is not accorded any special respect, and snubs and disrespect of expertise is tolerated). This is one of my failures: a policy that I attempted to institute in Wikipedia's first year, but for which I did not muster adequate support, was the policy of respecting and deferring politely to experts. (Those who were there will, I hope, remember that I tried very hard.)  ^ T. Kriplean, I. Beschastnikh, et al. (2008). "Articulations of wikiwork: uncovering valued work in Wikipedia through barnstars". Proceedings of the ACM: 47. doi:10.1145/1460563.1460573. ISBN 978-1-60558-007-4.  (Subscription required.) ^ Jean Goodwin (2009). "The Authority of Wikipedia" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on November 22, 2009. Retrieved January 31, 2011. Wikipedia's commitment to anonymity/pseudonymity thus imposes a sort of epistemic agnosticism on its readers  ^ Kittur, Aniket. "Power of the Few vs. Wisdom of the Crowd: Wikipedia and the Rise of the Bourgeoisie" (PDF). Viktoria Institute. Retrieved August 13, 2014.  ^ a b c Blodget, Henry (January 3, 2009). "Who The Hell Writes Wikipedia, Anyway?". Business Insider.  ^ Wilson, Chris (February 22, 2008). "The Wisdom of the Chaperones". Slate. Retrieved August 13, 2014.  ^ Swartz, Aaron (September 4, 2006). "Raw Thought: Who Writes Wikipedia?". Retrieved February 23, 2008.  ^ a b Goldman, Eric. "Wikipedia's Labor Squeeze and its Consequences". 8. Journal on Telecommunications and High Technology Law.  ^ Noveck, Beth Simone. "Wikipedia and the Future of Legal Education". 57. Journal of Legal Education.  ^ "Wikipedia "Good Samaritans" Are on the Money". Scientific American. October 19, 2007. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Yair Amichai–Hamburger, Naama Lamdan, Rinat Madiel, Tsahi Hayat, Personality Characteristics of Wikipedia Members, CyberPsychology & Behavior, December 1, 2008, 11 (6): 679–681; doi:10.1089/cpb.2007.0225. ^ "Wikipedians are 'closed' and 'disagreeable'". New Scientist. Retrieved July 13, 2010.  (Subscription required.) ^ "The Misunderstood Personality Profile of Wikipedia Members". psychologytoday.com. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Giles, Jim (August 4, 2009). "After the boom, is Wikipedia heading for bust?". New Scientist.  ^ "Where Are the Women in Wikipedia? – Room for Debate". NYTimes.com. February 2, 2011. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Lam, Shyong; Anuradha Uduwage; Zhenhua Dong; Shilad Sen; David R. Musicant; Loren Terveen; John Riedl (October 3–5, 2011). "WP:Clubhouse? An Exploration of Wikipedia's Gender Imbalance" (PDF). WikiSym 2011. Retrieved October 28, 2013.  ^ Cohen, Noam. "Define Gender Gap? Look Up Wikipedia's Contributor List". The New York Times. The New York Times Company. Retrieved October 28, 2013.  ^ Chom, Noam (January 31, 2011). "Define Gender Gap? Look Up Wikipedia's Contributor List". The New York Times. p. B–1. Retrieved May 9, 2012.  ^ Basch, Linda (February 6, 2011). "Male-Dominated Web Site Seeking Female Experts" (Letters to the Editor). The New York Times. p. WK–7. Retrieved May 9, 2012.  ^ "OCAD to 'Storm Wikipedia' this fall". CBC News. August 27, 2013. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ Wikimedia Foundation. 2008. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on November 18, 2016. Retrieved December 27, 2016.  ^ "Wikipedia 'completely failed' to fix gender imbalance". BBC News. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Dimitra Kessenides (December 26, 2017). Bloomberg News Weekly, "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". p. 73. ^ "Statistics". English Wikipedia. Retrieved June 21, 2008.  ^ List of Wikipedias ^ "Wikipedia:List of Wikipedias". English Wikipedia. Retrieved April 26, 2017.  ^ List of Wikipedias – Meta ^ "List of Wikipedias". Wikimedia Meta-Wiki. Retrieved 26 April 2017.  ^ "Spelling". Manual of Style. Wikipedia. Retrieved May 19, 2007.  ^ "Countering systemic bias". Retrieved May 19, 2007.  ^ "Fair use". Meta-Wiki. Retrieved July 14, 2007.  ^ "Images on Wikipedia". Retrieved July 14, 2007.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas (January 3, 2007). "The Visual Side of Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved October 30, 2007.  ^ Jimmy Wales, "Wikipedia is an encyclopedia", March 8, 2005, <Wikipedia-l@wikimedia.org> ^ "Meta-Wiki". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 24, 2009.  ^ "Meta-Wiki Statistics". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 24, 2008.  ^ "List of articles every Wikipedia should have". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 24, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia: Translation". English Wikipedia. Retrieved February 3, 2007.  ^ Yasseri, Taha; Sumi, Robert; Kertész, János (January 17, 2012). "Circadian Patterns of Wikipedia Editorial Activity: A Demographic Analysis". PLoS ONE. 7 (1): e30091. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0030091. Retrieved January 17, 2012.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation 2011–12 Annual Plan" (PDF). Wikimedia Foundation. p. 8. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ a b c "The future of Wikipedia: WikiPeaks?". The Economist. March 1, 2014. Retrieved March 11, 2014.  ^ Andrew Lih. Wikipedia. Alternative edit policies at Wikipedia in other languages. ^ Jemielniak, Dariusz (June 22, 2014). "The Unbearable Bureaucracy of Wikipedia". Slate. Retrieved August 18, 2014.  ^ D. Jemielniak, Common Knowledge, Stanford University Press, 2014. ^ Messer-Kruse, Timothy (February 12, 2012) The 'Undue Weight' of Truth on Wikipedia Archived December 18, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. The Chronicle of Higher Education Retrieved March 27, 2014 ^ Colón-Aguirre, Monica &Fleming-May, Rachel A. (October 11, 2012) "You Just Type in What You Are Looking For": Undergraduates' Use of Library Resources vs. Wikipedia Archived April 19, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. (p. 392) The Journal of Academic Librarianship Retrieved March 27, 2014 ^ Bowling Green News (February 27, 2012) Wikipedia experience sparks national debate Archived August 27, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Bowling Green State University Retrieved March 27, 2014 ^ Wisdom? More like dumbness of the crowds | Oliver Kamm – Times Online (archive version 2011-08-14) (Author's own copy Archived September 5, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.) ^ "Plagiarism by Wikipedia editors". Wikipedia Watch. October 27, 2006. Archived from the original on November 25, 2009.  ^ "Wikipedia, Britannica: A Toss-Up". Wired. Associated Press. December 15, 2005. Retrieved August 8, 2015.  ^ Reagle, pp. 165–166. ^ Fatally Flawed: Refuting the recent study on encyclopedic accuracy by the journal Nature Archived July 9, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., Encyclopædia Britannica, March 2006 ^ "Encyclopaedia Britannica and Nature: a response" (PDF). Retrieved July 13, 2010.  ^ "Nature's responses to Encyclopaedia Britannica". Nature. March 30, 2006. Retrieved March 19, 2012.  ^ See author acknowledged comments in response to the citation of the Nature study, at PLoS One, 2014, "Citation of fundamentally flawed Nature quality 'study' ", In response to T. Yasseri et al. (2012) Dynamics of Conflicts in Wikipedia, Published June 20, 2012, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0038869, see "Archived copy". Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2014. , accessed July 21, 2014. ^ "Wikipedia:General disclaimer". English Wikipedia. Retrieved April 22, 2008.  ^ Public Information Research, Wikipedia Watch ^ Raphel, JR. "The 15 Biggest Wikipedia Blunders". PC World. Retrieved September 2, 2009.  ^ Cowen, Tyler (March 14, 2008). "Cooked Books". The New Republic. Archived from the original on March 18, 2008. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Stacy Schiff (July 31, 2006). "Know It All". The New Yorker.  ^ Danah Boyd (January 4, 2005). "Academia and Wikipedia". Many 2 Many: A Group Weblog on Social Software. Corante. Retrieved December 18, 2008. [The author, Danah Boyd, describes herself as] an expert on social media[,] […] a doctoral student in the School of Information at the University of California, Berkeley [,] and a fellow at the Harvard University Berkman Center for Internet & Society [at Harvard Law School.]  ^ Robert McHenry, "The Faith-Based Encyclopedia" Archived January 16, 2006, at the Wayback Machine., Tech Central Station, November 15, 2004. ^ "Inside Wikipedia – Attack of the PR Industry". Deutsche Welle. June 30, 2014. Retrieved July 2, 2014.  ^ "Toward a New Compendium of Knowledge (longer version)". Citizendium. Archived from the original on October 11, 2006. Retrieved October 10, 2006.  ^ a b Elder, Jeff (June 16, 2014). "Wikipedia Strengthens Rules Against Undisclosed Editing". The Wall Street Journal.  ^ Ahrens, Frank (July 9, 2006). "Death by Wikipedia: The Kenneth Lay Chronicles". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 1, 2006.  ^ Kane, Margaret (January 30, 2006). "Politicians notice Wikipedia". CNET. Retrieved January 28, 2007.  ^ Bergstein, Brian (January 23, 2007). "Microsoft offers cash for Wikipedia edit". MSNBC. Retrieved February 1, 2007.  ^ Hafner, Katie (August 19, 2007). "Lifting Corporate Fingerprints From the Editing of Wikipedia". The New York Times. p. 1. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ a b Stephen Colbert (July 30, 2006). "Wikiality". Retrieved October 8, 2015.  ^ "Wide World of Wikipedia". The Emory Wheel. April 21, 2006. Archived from the original on November 7, 2007. Retrieved October 17, 2007.  ^ Waters, N. L. (2007). "Why you can't cite Wikipedia in my class". Communications of the ACM. 50 (9): 15. doi:10.1145/1284621.1284635.  ^ Jaschik, Scott (January 26, 2007). "A Stand Against Wikipedia". Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved January 27, 2007.  ^ Helm, Burt (December 14, 2005). "Wikipedia: 'A Work in Progress'". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on April 21, 2012. Retrieved January 29, 2007.  ^ "Jimmy Wales", Biography Resource Center Online. (Gale, 2006.) ^ Child, Maxwell L., "Professors Split on Wiki Debate" Archived December 20, 2008, at the Wayback Machine., The Harvard Crimson, Monday, February 26, 2007. ^ Chloe Stothart. "Web threatens learning ethos" Archived December 21, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.. The Times Higher Education Supplement, 2007, 1799 (June 22), p. 2. ^ Cohen, Morris; Olson, Kent (2010). Legal Research in a Nutshell (10th ed.). St. Paul, Minnesota, USA: Thomson Reuters. pp. 32–34. ISBN 978-0-314-26408-4.  ^ a b Julie Beck. "Doctors' #1 Source for Healthcare Information: Wikipedia". The Atlantic, March 5, 2014. ^ a b Green, Emma (May 7, 2014). "Can Wikipedia Ever Be a Definitive Medical Text? – Julie Beck". The Atlantic. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Kittur, Aniket; Kraut, Robert E. (2008). "Harnessing the wisdom of crowds in Wikipedia: quality through coordination". Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work. New York: ACM. pp. 37–46. doi:10.1145/1460563.1460572. ISBN 978-1-60558-007-4. [permanent dead link] ^ a b Roy Rosenzweig (June 2006). "Can History be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the Past". The Journal of American History. 93 (1): 117–146. doi:10.2307/4486062. JSTOR 4486062. Archived from the original on April 25, 2010. Retrieved August 11, 2006.  (Center for History and New Media.) ^ Andrew Orlowski (October 18, 2005). "Wikipedia founder admits to serious quality problems". The Register. Retrieved September 30, 2007.  ^ "Cancer information on Wikipedia is accurate, but not very readable, study finds". Science Daily. June 2, 2010. Retrieved December 31, 2010.  ^ "Fact or fiction? Wikipedia's variety of contributors is not only a strength". The Economist. March 10, 2007. Retrieved December 31, 2010.  ^ Wikipedia:PAPER ^ "The battle for Wikipedia's soul". The Economist. March 6, 2008. Retrieved March 7, 2008.  ^ Douglas, Ian (November 10, 2007). "Wikipedia: an online encyclopedia torn apart". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved November 23, 2010.  ^ Sophie Taylor (April 5, 2008). "China allows access to English Wikipedia". Reuters. Retrieved July 29, 2008.  ^ Bruilliard, Karin (May 21, 2010). "Pakistan blocks YouTube a day after shutdown of Facebook over Muhammad issue". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 24, 2011.  ^ "Wikipedia child image censored". BBC News. December 8, 2008. Retrieved December 8, 2008.  ^ a b Kittur, A., Chi, E. H., and Suh, B. 2009. What's in Wikipedia? Mapping Topics and Conflict Using Socially Annotated Category Structure Archived April 13, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. In Proceedings of the 27th international Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Boston, Massachusetts, USA, April 4–9, 2009). CHI '09. ACM, New York, USA, 1509–1512. ^ Petrusich, Amanda (October 20, 2011). "Wikipedia's Deep Dive Into a Library Collection". The New York Times. Retrieved October 28, 2011.  ^ Lam, Shyong; Anuradha Uduwage; Zhenhua Dong; Shilad Sen; David R. Musicant; Loren Terveen; John Riedl (October 3–5, 2011). "WP: Clubhouse? An Exploration of Wikipedia's Gender Imblance" (PDF). WikiSym 2011: 4.  ^ Mark Graham, Mapping the Geographies of Wikipedia Content, Zerogeography.net (November 12, 2009). ^ The Guardian 2014 (London) The Guardian view on Wikipedia: evolving truth Archived November 12, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. ^ a b Quilter, Laura (October 24, 2012). "Systemic Bias in Wikipedia: What It Looks Like, and How to Deal with It". University of Massachusetts – Amherst. Retrieved November 26, 2012.  ^ "Edit Wars Reveal the 10 Most Controversial Topics on Wikipedia[permanent dead link]", MIT Technology Review, July 17, 2013. ^ a b c "The Most Controversial Topics in Wikipedia: A Multilingual and Geographical Analysis by Taha Yasseri, Anselm Spoerri, Mark Graham, Janos Kertesz :: SSRN". Papers.ssrn.com. May 23, 2013. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2269392. SSRN 2269392.  Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ Das, Sanmay; Allen, Lavoie; Malik, Magdon-Ismail (November 1, 2013). "Manipulation among the arbiters of collective intelligence: How Wikipedia administrators mold public opinion". CIKM '13 Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on Information & Knowledge Management. San Francisco, California, USA: ACM. pp. 1097–1106. doi:10.1145/2505515.2505566. ISBN 978-1-4503-2263-8.  ^ Das, Sanmay; Allen, Lavoie; Malik, Magdon-Ismail (December 24, 2016). "Manipulation among the arbiters of collective intelligence: How Wikipedia administrators mold public opinion.". ACM Transactions on the Web. New York, NY, USA: ACM. 10 (4): 24. doi:10.1145/3001937.  ^ a b Dimitra Kessenides (December 22, 2016). "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". Bloomberg News Weekly. p. 72. Retrieved December 26, 2016.  ^ Sanger, Larry. "What should we do about Wikipedia's porn problem?". Retrieved July 26, 2012.  ^ Metz, Cade (December 7, 2008). "Brit ISPs censor Wikipedia over 'child porn' album cover". The Register. Retrieved May 10, 2009.  ^ Raphael, JR (December 10, 2008). "Wikipedia Censorship Sparks Free Speech Debate". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 10, 2009.  ^ Farrell, Nick (April 29, 2010). "Wikipedia denies child abuse allegations: Co-founder grassed the outfit to the FBI". The Inquirer. Retrieved October 9, 2010.  ^ a b Metz, Cade (April 9, 2010). "Wikifounder reports Wikiparent to FBI over 'child porn'". The Register. Retrieved April 19, 2010.  ^ "Wikipedia blasts co-founder's accusations of child porn on website". The Economic Times. India. April 29, 2010. Retrieved April 29, 2010.  ^ a b "Wikipedia blasts talk of child porn at website". Agence France-Presse. April 28, 2010. Retrieved April 29, 2010.  ^ "Wikimedia pornography row deepens as Wales cedes rights". BBC News. May 10, 2010. Retrieved May 19, 2010.  ^ Gray, Lila (September 17, 2013). "Wikipedia Gives Porn a Break". XBIZ.com. Retrieved November 10, 2013.  ^ Andrew McStay, 2014, Privacy and Philosophy: New Media and Affective Protocol Archived April 14, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., New York Peter Lang. ^ Heise – Gericht weist einstweilige Verfügung gegen Wikimedia Deutschland ab (update), by Torsten Kleinz, February 9, 2006. ^ "IT Service Management Software". OTRS.com. Retrieved June 9, 2012.  ^ Paling, Emma. "Wikipedia's Hostility to Women". The Atlantic. Retrieved October 24, 2015.  ^ Auerbach, David. "Encyclopedia Frown". Slate. Retrieved October 24, 2015.  ^ "In UK, rising chorus of outrage over online misogyny". CSMonitor.com.  ^ Paling, Emma (October 21, 2015). "Wikipedia's Hostility to Women". The Atlantic. Retrieved December 10, 2016.  ^ Ayers, Phoebe (2008). How Wikipedia Works. San Francisco: No Starch Press. p. 213. ISBN 1-59327-176-X.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation – Financial Statements – June 30, 2011 and 2010" (PDF). Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation IRS Form 990" (PDF). Retrieved October 14, 2014.  ^ "Press releases/WMF announces new ED Lila Tretikov". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ a b Jeff Elder, The Wall Street Journal, May 1, 2014, "Wikipedia's New Chief: From Soviet Union to World's Sixth-Largest Site". ^ a b Naom Cohen (May 1, 2014). "Media: Open-Source Software Specialist Selected as Executive Director of Wikipedia". The New York Times.  ^ Dimitra Kessenides. Bloomberg News Weekly. December 26, 2016. "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". ^ Dimitra Kessenides. Bloomberg News Weekly. December 26, 2016, p. 74. "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". ^ Mark Bergsma. "Wikimedia Architecture" (PDF). Wikimedia Foundation. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 3, 2009. Retrieved June 27, 2008.  ^ "Version: Installed extensions". . Retrieved August 18, 2014. ^ Michael Snow. "Lucene search: Internal search function returns to service". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved February 26, 2009.  ^ Brion Vibber. "[Wikitech-l] Lucene search". Retrieved February 26, 2009.  ^ "Extension:Lucene-search". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved August 31, 2009.  ^ "mediawiki – Revision 55688: /branches/lucene-search-2.1/lib". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved August 31, 2009.  ^ Emil Protalinski (July 2, 2013). "Wikimedia rolls out WYSIWYG visual editor for logged-in users accessing Wikipedia articles in English". The Next Web. Retrieved July 6, 2013.  ^ Curtis, Sophie (July 23, 2013). "Wikipedia introduces new features to entice editors". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved August 18, 2013.  ^ L.M. (December 13, 2011). "Changes at Wikipedia: Seeing things". The Economist. Retrieved July 28, 2013.  ^ Lucian Parfeni (July 2, 2013). "Wikipedia's New VisualEditor Is the Best Update in Years and You Can Make It Better". Softpedia. Retrieved July 30, 2013.  ^ a b Orlowski, Andrew (August 1, 2013). "Wikipedians say no to Jimmy's 'buggy' WYSIWYG editor". The Register. Retrieved August 18, 2013.  ^ Wikipedia Bot Information ^ a b Daniel Nasaw (July 24, 2012). "Meet the 'bots' that edit Wikipedia". BBC News.  ^ Halliday, Josh; Arthur, Charles (July 26, 2012). "Boot up: The Wikipedia vandalism police, Apple analysts, and more". The Guardian. Retrieved September 5, 2012.  ^ Jervell, Ellen Emmerentze (July 13, 2014). "For This Author, 10,000 Wikipedia Articles Is a Good Day's Work". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 18, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia signpost: Abuse Filter is enabled". English Wikipedia. March 23, 2009. Retrieved July 13, 2010.  ^ Aljazeera, July 21, 2014, "MH17 Wikipedia entry edited from Russian Government IP Address". "Archived copy". Archived from the original on November 16, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2014.  ^ Wikipedia's policy on bots ^ Andrew Lih (2009). The Wikipedia Revolution, chapter Then came the Bots, pp. 99–106. ^ "Wikipedia: Wikiprojects". Retrieved 16 March 2015.  ^ "Wikipedia:Version 1.0 Editorial Team/Assessment". Retrieved 28 October 2007.  ^ "Comparing featured article groups and revision patterns correlations in Wikipedia". First Monday. Retrieved 13 July 2010.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin Wattenberg; Matthew M. McKeon (22 July 2007). "The Hidden Order of Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved 30 October 2007.  ^ Poderi, Giacomo, Wikipedia and the Featured Articles: How a Technological System Can Produce Best Quality Articles, Master thesis, University of Maastricht, October 2008. ^ Lindsey, David (5 April 2010). "Evaluating quality control of Wikipedia's featured articles". First Monday. 15 (4). Retrieved 29 January 2017.  ^ a b Wikipedia:Version 1.0 Editorial Team/Statistics – Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia ^ "Monthly request statistics", Wikimedia. Retrieved October 31, 2008.[dead link] ^ Domas Mituzas. "Wikipedia: Site internals, configuration, code examples and management issues" (PDF). MySQL Users Conference 2007. Retrieved June 27, 2008.  ^ Guido Urdaneta, Guillaume Pierre and Maarten van Steen. "Wikipedia Workload Analysis for Decentralized Hosting". Elsevier Computer Networks 53 (11), pp. 1830–1845, June 2009. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Weiss, Todd R. (October 9, 2008). "Wikipedia simplifies IT infrastructure by moving to one Linux vendor". Computerworld. Retrieved November 1, 2008.  ^ Paul, Ryan (October 9, 2008). "Wikipedia adopts Ubuntu for its server infrastructure". Ars Technica. Retrieved November 1, 2008.  ^ "Server roles at wikitech.wikimedia.org". Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved December 8, 2009.  ^ Palmier, Guillaume. "Wikimedia sites to move to primary data center in Ashburn, Virginia". WMF. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Verge, Jason. "It's Official: Ashburn is Wikipedia's New Home". Data Center Knowledge. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Frederic M. Scherer and David Ross, [1970] 1990. Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance, 3rd ed. Houghton-Mifflin. Description Archived May 3, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. and 1st ed. review extract[dead link].    • Google Scholar search of Frederic M. Scherer ^ a b c Patents, Citations, and Innovations, by Adam B. Jaffe, Manuel Trajtenberg, pp. 89–153. ^ Cohen, Noam (March 5, 2007). "A Contributor to Wikipedia Has His Fictional Side". The New York Times. Retrieved October 18, 2008.  ^ Wikipedia:Copyrights ^ Walter Vermeir (2007). "Resolution:License update". Wikizine. Retrieved December 4, 2007.  ^ Wikimedia ^ "Licensing update/Questions and Answers". Wikimedia Meta. Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved February 15, 2009.  ^ "Licensing_update/Timeline". Wikimedia Meta. Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved April 5, 2009.  ^ "Wikimedia community approves license migration". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved May 21, 2009.  ^ Cohen, Noam (July 19, 2009). "Wikipedia May Be a Font of Facts, but It's a Desert for Photos". New York Times. Retrieved March 9, 2013.  ^ "Wikipedia cleared in French defamation case". Reuters. November 2, 2007. Retrieved November 2, 2007.  ^ Anderson, Nate (May 2, 2008). "Dumb idea: suing Wikipedia for calling you "dumb"". Ars Technica. Retrieved May 4, 2008.  ^ "With Bing Reference". Archived from the original on March 8, 2013. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia on DVD" Archived June 3, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.. Linterweb. Retrieved June 1, 2007. "Linterweb is authorized to make a commercial use of the Wikipedia trademark restricted to the selling of the Encyclopedia CDs and DVDs". ^ "Wikipedia 0.5 Available on a CD-ROM" Archived May 3, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.. Wikipedia on DVD. Linterweb. "The DVD or CD-ROM version 0.5 was commercially available for purchase." Retrieved June 1, 2007. ^ "Polish Wikipedia on DVD". Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia:DVD". Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "CDPedia (Python Argentina)". Retrieved July 7, 2011.  ^ Wikipedia CD Selection. Retrieved September 8, 2009. ^ "Wikipedia turned into book". The Daily Telegraph. London: Telegraph Media Group. June 16, 2009. Archived from the original on September 9, 2009. Retrieved September 8, 2009.  ^ "Wikipedia Selection for Schools". Retrieved July 14, 2012.  ^ Thiel, Thomas (September 27, 2010). "Wikipedia und Amazon: Der Marketplace soll es richten". Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (in German). Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung. Archived from the original on November 26, 2010. Retrieved December 6, 2010.  ^ Wikipedia policies on data download ^ Data dumps: Downloading Images, Wikimedia Meta-Wiki ^ "Wikipedia Reference Desk". Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Brad Stone, "How Google's Android chief, Sundar Pichai, became the most powerful man in mobile", June 30 – July 6, 2014, Bloomberg BusinessWeek, pp. 47–51. ^ "Wikipedia – Android Apps on Google Play". Play.Google.com. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia Mobile on the App Store on iTunes". iTunes.Apple.com. August 4, 2014. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ "Wikimedia Mobile is Officially Launched". Wikimedia Technical Blog. June 30, 2009. Retrieved July 22, 2009.  ^ "Local Points Of Interest In Wikipedia". May 15, 2011. Retrieved May 15, 2011.  ^ "iPhone Gems: Wikipedia Apps". November 30, 2008. Retrieved July 22, 2008.  ^ Ellis, Justin (January 17, 2013). "Wikipedia plans to expand mobile access around the globe with new funding". NiemanLab. Nieman Journalism Lab. Retrieved April 22, 2013.  ^ Andrew Lih (June 20, 2015). "Can Wikipedia Survive?".  ^ Andrew Brown (June 25, 2015). "Wikipedia editors are a dying breed. The reason? Mobile". The Guardian.  ^ "Wikipedia:Modelling Wikipedia's growth". Retrieved December 22, 2007.  ^ "694 Million People Currently Use the Internet Worldwide According To comScore Networks". comScore. May 4, 2006. Archived from the original on July 30, 2008. Retrieved December 16, 2007. Wikipedia has emerged as a site that continues to increase in popularity, both globally and in the US  ^ "Google Traffic To Wikipedia up 166% Year over Year". Hitwise. February 16, 2007. Retrieved December 22, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedia and Academic Research". Hitwise. October 17, 2006. Retrieved February 6, 2008.  ^ West, Stuart. "Wikipedia's Evolving Impact: slideshow presentation at TED2010" (PDF). Retrieved October 23, 2015.  ^ Rainie, Lee; Bill Tancer (December 15, 2007). "Wikipedia users" (PDF). Pew Internet & American Life Project. Pew Research Center. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 6, 2008. Retrieved December 15, 2007. 36% of online American adults consult Wikipedia. It is particularly popular with the well-educated and current college-age students.  ^ SAI (October 7, 2011). "The World's Most Valuable Startups". Business Insider. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ "Research:Wikipedia Readership Survey 2011/Results – Meta". Wikimedia. February 6, 2012. Retrieved April 16, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia:Wikipedia in the media". Wikipedia. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Bourgeois et al. v. Peters et al." (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on February 3, 2007. Retrieved February 6, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedian Justice" (PDF)|format= requires |url= (help). SSRN 1346311.  Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ "LEGISinfo – House Government Bill C-38 (38–1)". Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Arias, Martha L. (January 29, 2007). "Wikipedia: The Free Online Encyclopedia and its Use as Court Source". Internet Business Law Services. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  (The name "World Intellectual Property Office" should however read "World Intellectual Property Organization" in this source.) ^ Cohen, Noam (January 29, 2007). "Courts Turn to Wikipedia, but Selectively". The New York Times. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Aftergood, Steven (March 21, 2007). "The Wikipedia Factor in US Intelligence". Federation of American Scientists Project on Government Secrecy. Retrieved April 14, 2007.  ^ Butler, Declan (December 16, 2008). "Publish in Wikipedia or perish". Nature News. doi:10.1038/news.2008.1312.  ^ Shaw, Donna (February–March 2008). "Wikipedia in the Newsroom". American Journalism Review. Retrieved February 11, 2008.  ^ Lexington (September 24, 2011). "Classlessness in America: The uses and abuses of an enduring myth". The Economist. Retrieved September 27, 2011. Socialist Labour Party of America […] though it can trace its history as far back as 1876, when it was known as the Workingmen's Party, no less an authority than Wikipedia pronounces it "moribund".  ^ "Shizuoka newspaper plagiarized Wikipedia article". Japan News Review. July 5, 2007.  ^ "Express-News staffer resigns after plagiarism in column is discovered" at the Wayback Machine (archived October 15, 2007), San Antonio Express-News, January 9, 2007. ^ Frank Bridgewater. "Inquiry prompts reporter's dismissal". Honolulu Star-Bulletin. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Grossman, Lev (December 13, 2006). "Time's Person of the Year: You". Time. Time. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Radio 4 documentary, BBC". 2007. Retrieved April 24, 2016.  ^ "Comunicato stampa. On. Franco Grillini. Wikipedia. Interrogazione a Rutelli. Con "diritto di panorama" promuovere arte e architettura contemporanea italiana. Rivedere con urgenza legge copyright" [Press release. Honorable Franco Grillini. Wikipedia. Interview with Rutelli about the "right to view" promoting contemporary art and architecture of Italy. Review with urgency copyright law] (in Italian). October 12, 2007. Archived from the original on March 30, 2009. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Jose Antonio Vargas (September 17, 2007). "On Wikipedia, Debating 2008 Hopefuls' Every Facet". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Jennifer Ablan (October 22, 2007). "Wikipedia page the latest status symbol". Reuters. Retrieved October 24, 2007.  ^ Witzleb, Normann (2009). "Engaging with the World: Students of Comparative Law Write for Wikipedia". 19 (1 and 2). Legal Education Review: 83–98.  ^ "AI Research Trends". One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI100). Stanford University. Retrieved September 3, 2016.  ^ "Trophy box", Meta-Wiki (March 28, 2005). ^ "Webby Awards 2004". The International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences. 2004. Archived from the original on July 22, 2011.  ^ Zumpano, Anthony (January 29, 2007). "Similar Search Results: Google Wins". Interbrand. Archived from the original on February 20, 2007. Retrieved January 28, 2007.  ^ "Die Quadriga – Award 2008". Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Erasmus Prize – Praemium Erasmianum". Praemium Erasmianum Foundation. Retrieved January 15, 2015.  ^ "Premio Princesa de Asturias de Cooperación Internacional 2015". Fundación Princesa de Asturias. Retrieved June 17, 2015.  ^ "Los fundadores de Wikipedia destacan la versión en asturiano" [The founders of Wikipedia highlight the Asturian version] (in Spanish). La Nueva España. Retrieved October 20, 2015.  ^ "Wikipedia Celebrates 750 Years Of American Independence". The Onion. July 26, 2006. Retrieved October 15, 2006.  ^ "'L.A. Law' Wikipedia Page Viewed 874 Times Today". The Onion. November 24, 2010.  ^ "The Office: The Negotiation, 3.19". April 5, 2007. Retrieved December 27, 2014.  ^ "'Office' fans, inspired by Michael Scott, flock to edit Wikipedia". USA Today. April 12, 2007. Retrieved December 12, 2014.  ^ Bakken, Janae. "My Number One Doctor"; Scrubs; ABC; December 6, 2007. ^ "Professor Wikipedia – CollegeHumor Video". CollegeHumor. November 17, 2009. Retrieved April 19, 2011.  ^ "Dilbert comic strip for 05/08/2009 from the official Dilbert comic strips archive". Universal Uclick. May 8, 2009. Retrieved March 10, 2013.  ^ "Interview With Nick Doody and Matt Kirshen". British Comedy Guide. Retrieved July 31, 2009.  ^ "Your Wikipedia Entries". Tosh.0. February 3, 2010. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia Updates". Tosh.0. February 3, 2010. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Emily Flake (August 23, 2013). "Manning/Wikipedia cartoon". Retrieved August 26, 2013.  ^ "The obstacles to reforming our prisons – The Times". thetimes.co.uk. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ "john julius norwich -Search – The Times". thetimes.co.uk. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ "Announcement of Wiktionary's creation". meta.wikimedia.org. Retrieved July 14, 2012.  ^ "Our projects", Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved January 24, 2007. ^ Bosman, Julie. "After 244 Years, Encyclopaedia Britannica Stops the Presses". The New York Times. Retrieved January 26, 2015.  ^ "Encyclopedia Britannica Dies At The Hands Of Wikipedia, Gizmocrazed.com (with statista infographic from NYTimes.com)". Gizmocrazed.com. March 20, 2012. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Christopher Caldwell (June 14, 2013). "A chapter in the Enlightenment closes". ft.com. Retrieved June 15, 2013. Bertelsmann did not resort to euphemism this week when it announced the end of the Brockhaus encyclopedia brand. Brockhaus had been publishing reference books for two centuries when the media group bought it in 2008. […] The internet has finished off Brockhaus altogether. […] What Germans like is Wikipedia.  ^ "The amorality of Web 2.0". Rough Type. October 3, 2005. Retrieved July 15, 2006.  ^ "Technical solutions: Wisdom of the crowds". Nature. Retrieved October 10, 2006.  ^ Alison Flood. "Alison Flood: Should traditional biography be buried alongside Shakespeare's breakfast?". The Guardian. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Rada Mihalcea and Andras Csomai (2007). Wikify! Linking Documents to Encyclopedic Knowledge Archived February 18, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. Proc. CIKM. ^ David Milne and Ian H. Witten (2008). Learning to link with Wikipedia. Proc. CIKM. ^ Sisay Fissaha Adafre and [Maarten de Rijke] (2005). Discovering missing links in Wikipedia Archived July 17, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.. Proc. LinkKDD. ^ "Wikipedia-Mining Algorithm Reveals World's Most Influential Universities: An algorithm's list of the most influential universities contains some surprising entries.". MIT Technology Review. December 7, 2015. Retrieved December 27, 2015.  ^ Marmow Shaw, Jessica (December 10, 2015). "Harvard is only the 3rd most influential university in the world, according to this list". MarketWatch. Retrieved December 27, 2015.  ^ a b Bothwell, Ellie (December 15, 2015). "Wikipedia Ranking of World Universities: the top 100. List ranks institutions by search engine results and Wikipedia appearances". Times Higher Education. Retrieved December 27, 2015.  ^ Heart Internet. "Website discussing the emulator of the Domesday Project User Interface". Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Frauenfelder, Mark (November 21, 2000). "The next generation of online encyclopedias". CNN.com. Archived from the original on August 14, 2004.  ^ The Free Encyclopedia Project gnu.org (Archived January 3, 2012, at WebCite) ^ Orlowski, Andrew (September 18, 2006). "Wikipedia founder forks Wikipedia, More experts, less fiddling?". The Register. Retrieved June 27, 2007. Larry Sanger describes the Citizendium project as a "progressive or gradual fork", with the major difference that experts have the final say over edits.  ^ Lyman, Jay (September 20, 2006). "Wikipedia Co-Founder Planning New Expert-Authored Site". LinuxInsider. Retrieved June 27, 2007.  Notes ^ Many (but not all) of the glyphs featured are equivalent to the English letter W or sounds "wi", "wo" or "wa". See Wikipedia logo. ^ Registration is required for certain tasks such as editing protected pages, creating pages in the English Wikipedia, and uploading files. ^ For a user to be considered active in a given month, one or more actions have had to be made in said month. ^ Wikis are a type of website. The word "wiki" itself is from the Hawaiian word for "quick".[14] ^ As of 19:59, Wednesday, April 26, 2017 (UTC) ^ The procrastination principle dictates that you should wait for problems to arise before solving them. ^ Revisions with libelous content, criminal threats, or copyright infringements may be removed completely. ^ See for example the Biographies of Living Persons Noticeboard or Neutral Point of View Noticeboard, created to address content falling under their respective areas. ^ See "Libel" by David McHam for the legal distinction Further reading Academic studies Main article: Academic studies about Wikipedia Leitch, Thomas. Wikipedia U: Knowledge, authority, and a liberal education in the digital age (2014) Jensen, Richard. "Military History on the Electronic Frontier: Wikipedia Fights the War of 1812", The Journal of Military History 76#4 (October 2012): 523–556; online version. Yasseri, Taha; Robert Sumi; János Kertész (2012). Szolnoki, Attila, ed. "Circadian Patterns of Wikipedia Editorial Activity: A Demographic Analysis". PLoS ONE. 7 (1): e30091. arXiv:1109.1746. Bibcode:2012PLoSO...7E0091Y. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0030091. PMC 3260192. PMID 22272279.  Goldman, Eric (2010). "Wikipedia's Labor Squeeze and its Consequences". Journal of Telecommunications and High Technology Law. 8. SSRN 1458162#.  (A blog post by the author.) Nielsen, Finn (August 2007). "Scientific Citations in Wikipedia". First Monday. 12 (8). doi:10.5210/fm.v12i8.1997. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Pfeil, Ulrike; Panayiotis Zaphiris; Chee Siang Ang (2006). "Cultural Differences in Collaborative Authoring of Wikipedia". Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication. 12 (1): 88. doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2006.00316.x. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  Priedhorsky, Reid, Jilin Chen, Shyong (Tony) K. Lam, Katherine Panciera, Loren Terveen, and John Riedl. "Creating, Destroying, and Restoring Value in Wikipedia". Proc. GROUP 2007; doi:10.1145/1316624.1316663 Reagle, Joseph (2007). Do as I Do: Authorial Leadership in Wikipedia (PDF). WikiSym '07: Proceedings of the 2007 International Symposium on Wikis. Montreal, Canada: ACM. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  Rosenzweig, Roy. Can History be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the Past. (Originally published in The Journal of American History 93.1 (June 2006): 117–46.) Wilkinson, Dennis M.; Bernardo A. Huberman (April 2007). "Assessing the Value of Cooperation in Wikipedia". First Monday. 12 (4). doi:10.5210/fm.v12i4.1763. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Aaron Halfaker; R. Stuart Geiger; Jonathan T. Morgan; John Riedl (2012). "The Rise and Decline of an Open Collaboration Community". American Behavioral Scientist. 57 (5): 664. doi:10.1177/0002764212469365. Retrieved August 30, 2012.  Books Main article: List of books about Wikipedia Ayers, Phoebe; Matthews, Charles; Yates, Ben (September 2008). How Wikipedia Works: And How You Can Be a Part of It. San Francisco: No Starch Press. ISBN 978-1-59327-176-3.  Broughton, John (2008). Wikipedia – The Missing Manual. O'Reilly Media. ISBN 0-596-51516-2.  (See book review by Baker, as listed hereafter.) Broughton, John (2008). Wikipedia Reader's Guide. Sebastopol: Pogue Press. ISBN 0-596-52174-X.  Dalby, Andrew (2009). The World and Wikipedia: How We are Editing Reality. Siduri. ISBN 978-0-9562052-0-9.  Jemielniak, Dariusz (2014). Common Knowledge? An Ethnography of Wikipedia. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press. ISBN 9780804789448.  Keen, Andrew (2007). The Cult of the Amateur. Doubleday/Currency. ISBN 978-0-385-52080-5.  (Substantial criticisms of Wikipedia and other web 2.0 projects.) Listen to: Keen, Andrew (June 16, 2007). "Does the Internet Undermine Culture?". National Public Radio, USA.  The NPR interview with A. Keen, Weekend Edition Saturday, June 16, 2007. Lih, Andrew (2009). The Wikipedia Revolution: How a Bunch of Nobodies Created the World's Greatest Encyclopedia. New York: Hyperion. ISBN 978-1-4013-0371-6.  O'Sullivan, Dan (September 24, 2009). Wikipedia: a new community of practice?. Ashgate Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7546-7433-7.  Sheizaf Rafaeli & Yaron Ariel (2008). "Online motivational factors: Incentives for participation and contribution in Wikipedia." In Barak, A. Psychological aspects of cyberspace: Theory, research, applications. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp. 243–267.  Reagle, Joseph Michael Jr. (2010). Good Faith Collaboration: The Culture of Wikipedia. Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA: the MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-01447-2. Retrieved October 25, 2015.  Wells, Herbert George. (2013). World Brain. New Delhi, India: Isha Books (reprint). ISBN 978-9-333-39061-3. Retrieved June 18, 2016.  Book reviews and other articles Baker, Nicholson. "The Charms of Wikipedia". The New York Review of Books, March 20, 2008. Retrieved December 17, 2008. (Book rev. of The Missing Manual, by John Broughton, as listed previously.) Crovitz, L. Gordon. "Wikipedia's Old-Fashioned Revolution: The online encyclopedia is fast becoming the best." (Originally published in Wall Street Journal online – April 6, 2009.) Postrel, Virginia, "Who Killed Wikipedia? : A hardened corps of volunteer editors is the only force protecting Wikipedia. They might also be killing it", Pacific Standard magazine, November/December 2014 issue. Learning resources Wikiversity list of learning resources. (Includes related courses, Web-based seminars, slides, lecture notes, text books, quizzes, glossaries, etc.) The Great Book of Knowledge, Part 1: A Wiki is a Kind of Bus, Ideas, with Paul Kennedy, CBC Radio One, originally broadcast January 15, 2014. Webpage includes a link to the archived audio program (also found here). The radio documentary discusses Wikipedia's history, development and its place within the broader scope of the trend to democratized knowledge. It also includes interviews with several key Wikipedia staff and contributors, including Kat Walsh and Sue Gardner (audio, 53:58, Flash required). Other media coverage See also: List of films about Wikipedia "See Who's Editing Wikipedia – Diebold, the CIA, a Campaign", WIRED, August 14, 2007. Balke, Jeff (March 2008). "For Music Fans: Wikipedia; MySpace". Houston Chronicle. Broken Record (blog). Retrieved December 17, 2008.  Dee, Jonathan (July 1, 2007). "All the News That's Fit to Print Out". The New York Times Magazine. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Giles, Jim (September 20, 2007). "Wikipedia 2.0 – Now with Added Trust". New Scientist. Retrieved January 14, 2008.  Miliard, Mike (December 2, 2007). "Wikipedia Rules". The Phoenix. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Poe, Marshall (September 1, 2006). "The Hive". The Atlantic Monthly. Retrieved March 22, 2008.  Rosenwald, Michael S. (October 23, 2009). "Gatekeeper of D.C.'s entry: Road to city's Wikipedia page goes through a DuPont Circle bedroom". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 22, 2009.  Runciman, David (May 28, 2009). "Like Boiling a Frog". London Review of Books. Retrieved June 3, 2009.  Taylor, Chris (May 29, 2005). "It's a Wiki, Wiki World". Time. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  "Technological Quarterly: Brain Scan: The Free-knowledge Fundamentalist". The Economist Web and Print. June 5, 2008. Retrieved June 5, 2008. Jimmy Wales changed the world with Wikipedia, the hugely popular online encyclopedia that anyone can edit. What will he do next?  "Is Wikipedia Cracking Up?" The Independent, February 3, 2009. "Wikipedia probe into paid-for 'sockpuppet' entries", BBC News', October 21, 2013. "The Decline of Wikipedia", MIT Technology Review, October 22, 2013 Edits to Wikipedia pages on Bell, Garner, Diallo traced to 1 Police Plaza (March 2015), Capital Angola's Wikipedia Pirates Are Exposing Problems (March 2016), Motherboard Dark Side of Wikipedia at the Wayback Machine (archived August 4, 2016) Full Measure with Sharyl Attkinson, April 17, 2016. (Includes video.) Wales, Jimmy (December 9, 2016). "How Wikipedia Works". cato.org. Cato Institute. Jimmy Wales, founder of Wikipedia, discusses the site, how it’s treated by governments, and how it’s fueled by its users.  External links Find more aboutWikipediaat Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Travel guide from Wikivoyage Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Discussion from Meta-Wiki Documentation from MediaWiki Official website (Mobile) – multilingual portal (contains links to all language editions) (wikipedia.com still redirects here) Wikipedia at DMOZ Wikitrends: Wikipedia articles most visited today "Wikipedia collected news and commentary". The Guardian.  Wikipedia topic page at The New York Times Video of TED talk by Jimmy Wales on the birth of Wikipedia v t e Wikipedia Overview Purpose Censorship Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Deletionism and inclusionism Gender bias Racial bias MediaWiki Notability Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators Arbitration Committee Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wikipedian in residence Wikimania People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Larry Sanger Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikipedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Internet Watch Foundation Scientology Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz Lsjbot VisualEditor Art+Feminism #1Lib1Ref Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Wikipediocracy Wiki-Watch Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related Wikimedia movement Wikimedia Foundation projects The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Category v t e Wikis Types Personal Medical Semantic Wiki farm Components Software Markup Interwiki links Lists Wikis Software Markups and parsers Comparisons Software Wiki farms See also History of wikis Creole v t e Wikimedia Foundation People Current Aaron Halfaker Dariusz Jemielniak Guy Kawasaki Katherine Maher Jimmy Wales Past Hampton Catlin Danese Cooper Bishakha Datta Florence Devouard Oscar van Dillen Sue Gardner Arnnon Geshuri Mike Godwin James Heilman Erik Möller Lila Tretikov Luis Villa Content projects Wikipedia MediaWiki Wiktionary Wikiquote Wikibooks Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikinews Wikiversity Wikidata Wikivoyage Other List of Wikipedias List of Wikimedia chapters Wikimania The Signpost Litigation Wikimedia v. NSA Wikimedia movement Knowledge Engine v t e List of Wikipedias by article count 5,000,000+ English 2,000,000+ Cebuano Swedish German 1,000,000+ Dutch French Russian Italian Spanish Waray Polish Vietnamese Japanese 500,000+ Portuguese Chinese Ukrainian Catalan Persian Arabic 200,000+ Norwegian (bokmål/riksmål) Serbo-Croatian Finnish Hungarian Indonesian Korean Czech Romanian Serbian Turkish Malay Basque Esperanto Bulgarian Danish Minangkabau Armenian Kazakh Slovak Min Nan Hebrew 100,000+ Lithuanian Croatian Chechen Estonian Slovene Belarusian Galician Norwegian (nynorsk) Greek Uzbek Latin Simple English Urdu Volapük Hindi Azerbaijani Thai Georgian 50,000+ Tamil Welsh Macedonian Malagasy Occitan Latvian Bosnian Newar Tatar Tajik Tagalog Telugu Albanian Kirghiz Piedmontese Breton Belarusian (Taraškievica) Cantonese Haitian 20,000+ Javanese Kannada Icelandic Asturian Marathi Malayalam Bengali Afrikaans Irish Scots Chuvash West Frisian Burmese Swahili Aragonese Yoruba Ido Nepal Bhasa Sicilian Bishnupriya Manipuri Punjabi Alemannic 10,000+ Sundanese Mongolian Egyptian Arabic Samogitian Yiddish Odia Ossetian Sanskrit 1,000+ Uyghur Northern Sami Pashto Dutch Low Saxon Sindhi Jamaican Creole Crimean Tatar Silesian Assamese Ripuarian Konkani Tulu Wolof Classical Chinese 100+ Zulu Xhosa Bambara Venda Cree Authority control WorldCat Identities VIAF: 195846295 LCCN: no2008072801 ISNI: 0000 0004 4914 788X GND: 7545251-0 SUDOC: 11109383X BNF: cb150837752 (data) NKC: kn20090528031 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia&oldid=776980171" Categories: Wikipedia 2001 establishments in the United States American websites Collaborative projects Creative Commons-licensed websites Free internet encyclopedias Internet properties established in 2001 Multilingual websites Open content projects Social information processing Virtual communities Wikimedia projects Wikis Hidden categories: CS1 maint: Unfit url Webarchive template wayback links Pages containing links to subscription-only content CS1 German-language sources (de) Pages using citations with format and no URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2016 Articles with permanently dead external links Pages using web citations with no URL Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles with dead external links from July 2015 Articles with dead external links from March 2017 CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template webcite links Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use American English from November 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from April 2017 Pages using deprecated image syntax Articles containing potentially dated statements from April 2017 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles including recorded pronunciations Articles containing potentially dated statements from February 2014 Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2015 Articles containing potentially dated statements from January 2017 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from March 2017 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Wikipedia articles in need of updating from November 2016 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2008 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from October 2015 Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2010 Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2009 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007 Articles with DMOZ links Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Articles containing video clips Pages with graphs Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikibooks Wikinews Wikiquote Wikiversity Languages Acèh ???????? Afrikaans Akan Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ?????? ??????? Aragonés ????? Armãneashti Arpetan ??????? Asturianu Avañe'? ???? Aymar aru Az?rbaycanca ?????? Bamanankan ????? Bahasa Banjar Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ??????? Bikol Central Bislama ????????? Boarisch ??????? Bosanski Brezhoneg ?????? Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? Dolnoserbski Eesti ???????? Emiliàn e rumagnòl ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ?? G?k?y? ????? ??????? ?????? ?????? ?????? / Gõychi Konknni ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa Hawai?i ??????? ?????? Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue ??????/inuktitut Iñupiak ???? IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kalaallisut ????? Kapampangan ????????-??????? ??????? ????? / ????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî ???????? ????? ???? Ladino ????? ????? ??? ???? ?????? Latga?u Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Ligure Limburgs Lingála Livvinkarjala La .lojban. Luganda Lumbaart Magyar ?????? ?????????? Malagasy ?????? Malti M?ori ????? ????????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-d??ng-ng?? Mirandés ??????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????? N?huatl Dorerin Naoero Nederlands Nedersaksies ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norfuk / Pitkern Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? Pälzisch Pangasinan ?????? Papiamentu ???? Patois ????? ???? ????????? Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski ???????? Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Q?r?mtatarca Reo tahiti Ripoarisch Român? Romani Rumantsch Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sámegiella Gagana Samoa ????????? Sängö Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana Shqip Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? SiSwati Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????????? / ?????????? ?l?nski Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Sranantongo ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Taqbaylit Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ?????? Tetun ??? ???? ?????? ??? Tsetsêhestâhese Tshivenda Türkçe Türkmençe Twi ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? ???? ???????? / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Võro Walon ?? West-Vlams Winaray Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zazaki Zeêuws Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 24 April 2017, at 14:46. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_content |||Free content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For the use of free content on Wikipedia, see Wikipedia:Free content. Free Cultural Works logo Free content, libre content, or free information, is any kind of functional work, work of art, or other creative content that meets the definition of a free cultural work. Contents 1 Definition 2 Legal matters 2.1 Copyright 2.2 Public domain 2.3 Copyleft 3 Usage 3.1 Media 3.2 Software 3.3 Engineering and technology 3.4 Academia 3.5 Legislation 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Definition[edit] A free cultural work (free content) is, according to the Definition of free cultural works, one that has no significant legal restriction on people's freedom to: use the content and benefit from using it, study the content and apply what is learned, make and distribute copies of the content, change and improve the content and distribute these derivative works.[1][2] Free content encompasses all works in the public domain and also those copyrighted works whose licenses honor and uphold the freedoms mentioned above. Because the Berne Convention in most countries by default grants copyright holders monopolistic control over their creations, copyright content must be explicitly declared free, usually by the referencing or inclusion of licensing statements from within the work. Although there are a great many different definitions in regular everyday use, free content is legally very similar, if not like an identical twin, to open content. An analogy is the use of the rival terms free software and open source, which describe ideological differences rather than legal ones.[3][4][5] For instance, the Open Knowledge Foundation's Open Definition describes "open" as synonymous to the definition of free in the "Definition of Free Cultural Works" (as also in the Open Source Definition and Free Software Definition).[6] For such free/open content both movements recommend the same three Creative Commons licenses, the CC BY, CC BY-SA, and CC0.[7][8][9][10] Legal matters[edit] Copyright[edit] copyright Main article: Copyright Copyright is a legal concept, which gives the author or creator of a work legal control over the duplication and public performance of his or her work. In many jurisdictions, this is limited by a time period after which the works then enter the public domain. Copyright laws are a balance between the rights of creators of intellectual and artistic works and the rights of others to build upon those works. During the time period of copyright the author's work may only be copied, modified, or publicly performed with the consent of the author, unless the use is a fair use. Traditional copyright control limits the use of the work of the author to those who either pay royalties to the author for usage of the authors content, or limit their use to fair use. Secondly it limits the use of content whose author cannot be found.[11] Finally it creates a perceived barrier between authors by limiting derivative works, such as mashups and collaborative content[12] Public domain[edit] public domain Main article: Public domain The public domain is a range of creative works whose copyright has expired, or was never established; as well as ideas and facts[nb 1] which are ineligible for copyright. A public domain work is a work whose author has either relinquished to the public, or no longer can claim control over, the distribution and usage of the work. As such any person may manipulate, distribute, or otherwise utilize the work, without legal ramifications. A work in the public domain or released under a permissive licence may be referred to as "copycenter".[13] Copyleft[edit] Main article: Copyleft copyleft Copyleft is a play on the word copyright and describes the practice of using copyright law to remove restrictions on distributing copies and modified versions of a work.[14] The aim of copyleft is to use the legal framework of copyright to enable non-author parties to be able to reuse and, in many licensing schemes, modify content that is created by an author. Unlike works in the public domain, the author still maintains copyright over the material, however the author has granted a non-exclusive license to any person to distribute, and often modify, the work. Copyleft licenses require that any derivative works be distributed under the same terms, and that the original copyright notices be maintained. A symbol commonly associated with copyleft is a reversal of the copyright symbol, facing the other way; the opening of the C points left rather than right. Unlike the copyright symbol, the copyleft symbol does not have a codified meaning.[15] Usage[edit] Projects that provide free content exist in several areas of interest, such as software, academic literature, general literature, music, images, video, and engineering. Technology has reduced the cost of publication and reduced the entry barrier sufficiently to allow for the production of widely disseminated materials by individuals or small groups. Projects to provide free literature and multimedia content have become increasingly prominent owing to the ease of dissemination of materials that is associated with the development of computer technology. Such dissemination may have been too costly prior to these technological developments. Media[edit] Creative Commons Main article: Creative Commons In media, which includes textual, audio, and visual content, free licensing schemes such as some of the licenses made by Creative Commons have allowed for the dissemination of works under a clear set of legal permissions. Not all of the Creative Commons’ licenses are entirely free: their permissions may range from very liberal general redistribution and modification of the work to a more restrictive redistribution-only licensing. Since February 2008, Creative Commons licenses which are entirely free carry a badge indicating that they are "approved for free cultural works".[16] Repositories exist which exclusively feature free material provide content such as photographs, clip art, music,[17] and literature,.[18] While extensive reuse of free content from one website in another website is legal, it is usually not sensible because of the duplicate content problem. Wikipedia is amongst the most well known databases of user uploaded free content on the web. While the vast majority of content on Wikipedia is free content, some copyrighted material is hosted under Fair-use criteria. Software[edit] OSI logo FSF logo Main article: Free and open-source software Free and open source software, which is also often referred to as open source software and free software, is a maturing technology with major companies utilising free software to provide both services and technology to both end users and technical consumers. The ease of dissemination has allowed for increased modularity, which allows for smaller groups to contribute to projects as well as simplifying collaboration. Open source development models have been classified as having a similar peer-recognition and collaborative benefit incentives that are typified by more classical fields such as scientific research, with the social structures that result from this incentive model decreasing production cost.[19] Given sufficient interest in a software component, by using peer-to-peer distribution methods, distribution costs of software may be reduced, removing the burden of infrastructure maintenance from developers. As distribution resources are simultaneously provided by consumers, these software distribution models are scalable, that is the method is feasible regardless of the number of consumers. In some cases, free software vendors may use peer-to-peer technology as a method of dissemination.[20] In general, project hosting and code distribution is not a problem for the most of free projects as a number of providers offer them these services for free. Engineering and technology[edit] Open source hardware logo Free content principles have been translated into fields such as engineering, where designs and engineering knowledge can be readily shared and duplicated, in order to reduce overheads associated with project development. Open design principles can be applied in engineering and technological applications, with projects in mobile telephony, small-scale manufacture,[21] the automotive industry,[22][23] and even agricultural areas.[24] Technologies such as distributed manufacturing can allow computer-aided manufacturing and computer-aided design techniques to be able to develop small-scale production of components for the development of new, or repair of existing, devices. Rapid fabrication technologies underpin these developments, which allow end users of technology to be able to construct devices from pre-existing blueprints, using software and manufacturing hardware to convert information into physical objects. Academia[edit] open access Main article: Open access (publishing) In academic work, the majority of works are not free, although the percentage of works that are open access is growing rapidly. Open access refers to online research outputs that are free of all restrictions on access (e.g. access tolls) and free of many restrictions on use (e.g. certain copyright and license restrictions).[25] Authors may see open access publishing as a method of expanding the audience that is able to access their work to allow for greater impact of the publication, or may support it for ideological reasons.[26][27][28] Open access publishers such as PLOS and Biomed Central provide capacity for review and publishing of free works; though such publications are currently more common in science than humanities. Various funding institutions and governing research bodies have mandated that academics must produce their works to be open-access, in order to qualify for funding, such as the National Institutes of Health, RCUK (effective 2016) and the EU (effective 2020).[29][30][31][32] At an institutional level some universities, such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), have adopted open access publishing by default by introducing their own mandates.[33] Some mandates may permit delayed publication and may charge researchers for open access publishing.[34][35] Open content publication has been seen as a method of reducing costs associated with information retrieval in research, as universities typically pay to subscribe for access to content that is published through traditional means[10][36][37] whilst improving journal quality by discouraging the submission of research articles of reduced quality.[10] Subscriptions for non-free content journals may be expensive for universities to purchase, though the article are written and peer-reviewed by academics themselves at no cost to the publisher. This has led to disputes between publishers and some universities over subscription costs, such as the one which occurred between the University of California and the Nature Publishing Group.[38][39] For teaching purposes, some universities, including MIT, provide freely available course content, such as lecture notes, video resources and tutorials. This content is distributed via Internet resources to the general public. Publication of such resources may be either by a formal institution-wide program,[40] or alternately via informal content provided by individual academics or departments. Legislation[edit] Any country has its own law and legal system, sustained by its legislation, a set of law-documents — documents containing statutory obligation rules, usually law and created by legislatures. In a democratic country, each law-document is published as open media content, is in principle a free content; but in general there are no explicit license attributed for each law-document, so the license must be interpreted, is a implied license. Only few countries have explicit licenses in its law-documents, as the UK's Open Government Licence (a CC-BY compatible license). In the other countries, the implied license comes from its proper rules (general laws and rules about copyright in government works). The automatic protection provided by Berne Convention not apply to law-documents: Article 2.4 excludes the official texts from the automatic protection. It is also possible to "inherit" the license from context. The set of country's law-documents is made available through national repositories. Examples of law-document open repositories: LexML Brazil, Legislation.gov.uk, N-Lex of EU countries. In general a law-document is offered in more than one (open) official version, but the main one is that published by a government gazette. So, law-documents can eventually inherit license expressed by the repository or by the gazette that contains it. See also[edit] Content (media) Definition of Free Cultural Works Free and open source software Free culture movement Free software movement Freedom of information Libre knowledge Open Content Alliance Open publishing Open-source hardware Permissive free software licence Project Gutenberg Notes[edit] ^ The copyright status of uncreative aggregates of basic data may differ by region, for the USA see Feist Publications v. Rural Telephone Service, for Australia, see Telstra v Desktop Marketing Systems References[edit] ^ Erik Möller, e.a. (2008). "Definition of Free Cultural Works". 1.1. freedomdefined.org. Retrieved 2015-04-20.  ^ Stallman, Richard (November 13, 2008). "Free Software and Free Manuals". Free Software Foundation. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Stallman, Richard. "Why Open Source misses the point of Free Software". Free Software Foundation.  ^ Kelty, Christpher M. (2008). "The Cultural Significance of free Software - Two Bits" (PDF). Duke University press - durham and london. p. 99. Prior to 1998, Free Software referred either to the Free Software Foundation (and the watchful, micromanaging eye of Stallman) or to one of thousands of different commercial, avocational, or university-research projects, processes, licenses, and ideologies that had a variety of names: sourceware, freeware, shareware, open software, public domain software, and so on. The term Open Source, by contrast, sought to encompass them all in one movement.  ^ "Goodbye, "free software"; hello, "open source"". Catb.org. Retrieved 2012-10-25.  ^ Open Definition 2.1 on opendefinition.org "This essential meaning matches that of "open" with respect to software as in the Open Source Definition and is synonymous with "free" or "libre" as in the Free Software Definition and Definition of Free Cultural Works." ^ licenses on opendefinition.com ^ Creative Commons 4.0 BY and BY-SA licenses approved conformant with the Open Definition by Timothy Vollmer on creativecommons.org (December 27th, 2013) ^ Open Definition 2.0 released by Timothy Vollmer on creativecommons.org (October 7th, 2014) ^ a b c "Costs and business models in scientific research publishing: A report commissioned by the Wellcome Trust" (PDF). Retrieved May 23, 2009.  ^ "The Importance of Orphan Works Legislation".  ^ Ben Depoorter; Francesco Parisi (2002). "Fair use and copyright protection: a price theory explanation". International Review of Law and Economics. 21 (4): 453. doi:10.1016/S0144-8188#01)00071-0.  ^ Raymond, Eric S. "Copycenter". The Jargon File. Retrieved August 9, 2008.  ^ Dusollier, S (2003). "Open source and copyleft. Authorship reconsidered?". Columbia journal of Law and the Arts. 26 (296).  ^ Hall, G. Brent (2008). Open Source Approaches in Spatial Data Handling. Springer. p. 29. ISBN 3-540-74830-X. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Linksvayer, Mike (February 20, 2008). "Approved for Free Cultural Works". Creative Commons. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "iRate Radio". SourceForge.net. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "Gutenberg:No Cost or Freedom?". Project Gutenberg. April 23, 2007. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Mustonen, Mikko. "Copyleft – the economics of Linux and other open source software" (PDF). Discussion Paper No. 493. Department of Economics, University of Helsinki. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Pawlak, Michel; Bryce, Ciarán; Laurière, Stéphane (May 29, 2008). "The Practice of Free and Open Source Software Processes" (PDF). Rapport de recherche. inria-00274193, version 2. Institut national de recherche en informatique et en automatique (INRIA). N° 6519 (April 2008). ISSN 0249-6399. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Hendry, Andrew (March 4, 2008). "RepRap: An open-source 3D printer for the masses". Computerworld Australia. The Industry Standard. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Honsig, Markus (January 25, 2006). "The most open of all cars". Technology Review (in German). Heinz Heise. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "Australian drive for green commuter cars". The Sydney Morning Herald. Sydney. 14 June 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2015.  ^ Stewart, Jr., C. Neal (December 2005). "Open-source Agriculture" (PDF). ISB News Report. Information Systems for Biotechnology (ISB). Retrieved March 22, 2009.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Suber, Peter. "Open Access Overview". Earlham.edu. Retrieved on 2011-12-03. ^ Alma Swan; Sheridan Brown (May 2005). "Open access self-archiving: An author study" (PDF). Key Perspectives Limited.  ^ Andrew, Theo (October 30, 2003). "Trends in Self-Posting of Research Material Online by Academic Staff". Ariadne. UKOLN (37). ISSN 1361-3200. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Key Perspectives. "JISC/OSI Journal Authors Survey Report" (PDF). Joint Information Systems Committee (JISC). Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Haslam, Maryanne. "NHMRC Partnership Projects – Funding Policy" (PDF). National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 17, 2009. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "Policy on Enhancing Public Access to Archived Publications Resulting from NIH-Funded Research". Retrieved July 12, 2009.  ^ "Open access - RCUK Policy and revised guidance".  ^ "Outcome of Proceedings, 9526/16 RECH 208 TELECOM 100, The transition towards an Open Science System".  ^ "MIT faculty open access to their scholarly articles". MIT news. 20 March 2009.  ^ "Policy of the Society for General Microbiology towards author self-archiving on PubMed Central and institutional and other repositories". Retrieved April 10, 2009.  ^ "OnlineOpen". Retrieved April 10, 2009.  ^ Mayor, Susan (April 19, 2003). "Libraries face higher costs for academic journals". BMJ: British Medical Journal. BMJ Group. 326 (7394): 840. PMC 1125769.  |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ "AMS Journal price survey". Retrieved May 23, 2009.  ^ "Response from the University of California to the Public statement from Nature Publishing Group regarding subscription renewals at the California Digital Library" (PDF). June 10, 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 26, 2010. Retrieved September 13, 2015.  ^ Hawkes, Nigel (November 10, 2003). "Boycott 'greedy' journal publishers, say scientists". The Times. London. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Retrieved September 13, 2015.  ^ "About OpenCourseWare". Retrieved April 10, 2009.  Further reading[edit] D. Atkins; J. S. Brown; A. L. Hammond (February 2007). A Review of the Open Educational Resources (OER) Movement: Achievements, Challenges, and New Opportunities. (PDF). Report to The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation.  OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development: Giving Knowledge for free – The Emergence of Open Educational Resources. 2007, ISBN 92-64-03174-X. External links[edit] Definition of Free Cultural Works – A definition of "free content" or "free cultural works" similar to the free software definition "Episodes of collective invention" (PDF) (Peter B. Meyer; August 4, 2003) – article on several U.S.-oriented historical examples of free content in technology Open Definition – project by the Open Knowledge Foundation which provides a definition of "open" suitable for content and data What is free content? on WikiEducator v t e Intellectual property activism Issues Copyright infringement Digital rights management Gripe site Intellectual property Legal aspects of file sharing Mashup digital videos music Music piracy Orphan works Patents biological software software patent debate trolling Public domain Concepts All rights reversed Alternative compensation system Anti-copyright notice Business models for open source software Copyleft Commercial use of copyleft works Commons-based peer production Free content Free software license Infoanarchism Libertarian positions Open content Open design Open Music Model Open patent Open-source hardware Open source software Prize system contests Share-alike Video on demand Movements Access to Knowledge movement Anti-copyright Cultural environmentalism Free culture movement Free software movement Organizations Copyright Alliance Creative Commons Electronic Frontier Foundation Free Software Foundation Open Rights Group Organization for Transformative Works The Pirate Bay Piratbyrån Pirate Party Sci-Hub Students for Free Culture People Alexandra Elbakyan Rickard Falkvinge Lawrence Lessig Richard Stallman Peter Sunde Peter Suber Aaron Swartz Documentaries Steal This Film (2006, 2007) Good Copy Bad Copy (2007) RiP!: A Remix Manifesto (2008) TPB AFK: The Pirate Bay Away From Keyboard (2013) The Internet's Own Boy (2014) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Free_content&oldid=775063470" Categories: Free content Digital art Free software Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Pages using ISBN magic links Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages ??????? ???? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Català ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Gaeilge Galego ??? ??????? Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??? Latviešu Magyar ?????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ??? Napulitano ??????? Polski Português ??????? Scots Shqip Simple English Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ??? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 12 April 2017, at 12:27. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Encyclopedia |||Encyclopedia From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article is about the type of reference work. For other uses, see Encyclopedia (disambiguation). This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in German. (December 2015) Click [show] for important translation instructions.  View a machine-translated version of the German article. Google's machine translation is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. After translating, {{Translated|de|Enzyklopädie}} must be added to the talk page to ensure copyright compliance. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. Brockhaus Enzyklopädie An encyclopedia or encyclopaedia (also spelled encyclopædia, see spelling differences)[1] is a type of reference work or compendium holding a comprehensive summary of information from either all branches of knowledge or a particular branch of knowledge.[2] Encyclopedias are divided into articles or entries, which are usually accessed alphabetically by article name.[3] Encyclopedia entries are longer and more detailed than those in most dictionaries.[3] Generally speaking, unlike dictionary entries which focus on linguistic information about words, encyclopedia articles focus on factual information concerning the subject for which the article is named.[4][5][6][7] Encyclopedias have existed for around 2,000 years; the oldest still in existence, Naturalis Historia, was written starting in ca. AD 77 by Pliny the Elder and was not fully revised at the time of his death in AD 79. The modern encyclopedia evolved out of dictionaries around the 17th century. Historically, some encyclopedias were contained in one volume, whereas others, such as the Encyclopædia Britannica, the Enciclopedia Italiana (62 volumes, 56,000 pages) or the world's largest, Enciclopedia universal ilustrada europeo-americana (118 volumes, 105,000 pages), became huge multi-volume works. Some modern encyclopedias, such as Wikipedia, are often electronic and freely available. Contents 1 Etymology 2 Characteristics 3 History 3.1 Ancient times 3.2 Middle Ages 3.3 Renaissance 3.4 18th–19th centuries 3.5 20th century 3.6 21st century 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Etymology See also: American and British English spelling differences § Simplification of ae and oe Title page of "Lucubrationes..." 1541 edition, the first book to use the word encyclopedia in the title The word encyclopedia comes from the Koine Greek ????????? ???????,[8] transliterated enkyklios paideia, meaning "general education" from enkyklios (?????????), meaning "circular, recurrent, required regularly, general"[9] and paideia (???????), meaning "education, rearing of a child";[10] it was reduced to a single word due to an error[11] by copyists of Latin manuscripts. Together, the phrase literally translates as "complete instruction" or "complete knowledge". Indeed, the purpose of an encyclopedia is to collect knowledge disseminated around the globe; to set forth its general system to the men with whom we live, and transmit it to those who will come after us, so that the work of preceding centuries will not become useless to the centuries to come; and so that our offspring, becoming better instructed, will at the same time become more virtuous and happy, and that we should not die without having rendered a service to the human race in the future years to come. —?Diderot[12] Copyists of Latin manuscripts took this phrase to be a single Greek word, enkyklopaidia, with the same meaning, and this spurious Greek word became the New Latin word "encyclopaedia", which in turn came into English. Though the notion of a compendium of knowledge dates back thousands of years, the term was first used in the title of a book in 1517 by Johannes Aventinus: Encyclopedia orbisque doctrinarum, hoc est omnium artium, scientiarum, ipsius philosophiae index ac divisio, and in 1538 by Joachimus Fortius Ringelbergius, Lucubrationes vel potius absolutissima kyklopaideia (Basel, 1538). Title page of Skalich's Encyclopaedia, seu orbis disciplinarum, tam sacrarum quam prophanarum, epistemon from 1559, first to use the word encyclopaedia as a noun in the title The word encyclopaedia was first used as a noun in the title of his book by the Croatian encyclopedist Pavao Skali? in his Encyclopaedia seu orbis disciplinarum tam sacrarum quam prophanarum epistemon (Encyclopaedia, or Knowledge of the World of Disciplines, Basel, 1559). One of the oldest vernacular uses was by François Rabelais in his Pantagruel in 1532.[13][14] Several encyclopedias have names that include the suffix -p(a)edia, e.g., Banglapedia (on matters relevant for Bengal). In British usage, the spellings encyclopedia and encyclopaedia are both current.[15] In American usage, only the former is commonly used.[16] The spelling encyclopædia—with the æ ligature—was frequently used in the 19th century and is increasingly rare, although it is retained in product titles such as Encyclopædia Britannica and others. The Oxford English Dictionary (1989) records encyclopædia and encyclopaedia as equal alternatives (in that order), and notes the æ would be obsolete except that it is preserved in works that have Latin titles. Webster's Third New International Dictionary (1997–2002) features encyclopedia as the main headword and encyclopaedia as a minor variant. In addition, cyclopedia and cyclopaedia are now rarely used shortened forms of the word originating in the 17th century. Characteristics The modern encyclopedia was developed from the dictionary in the 18th century. Historically, both encyclopedias and dictionaries have been researched and written by well-educated, well-informed content experts, but they are significantly different in structure. A dictionary is a linguistic work which primarily focuses on alphabetical listing of words and their definitions. Synonymous words and those related by the subject matter are to be found scattered around the dictionary, giving no obvious place for in-depth treatment. Thus, a dictionary typically provides limited information, analysis or background for the word defined. While it may offer a definition, it may leave the reader lacking in understanding the meaning, significance or limitations of a term, and how the term relates to a broader field of knowledge. An encyclopedia is, allegedly, not written in order to convince, although one of its goals is indeed to convince its reader about its own veracity. In the terms of Aristotle's Modes of persuasion, a dictionary should persuade the reader through logos (conveying only appropriate emotions); it will be expected to have a lack of pathos (it should not stir up irrelevant emotions), and to have little ethos except that of the dictionary itself. To address those needs, an encyclopedia article is typically not limited to simple definitions, and is not limited to defining an individual word, but provides a more extensive meaning for a subject or discipline. In addition to defining and listing synonymous terms for the topic, the article is able to treat the topic's more extensive meaning in more depth and convey the most relevant accumulated knowledge on that subject. An encyclopedia article also often includes many maps and illustrations, as well as bibliography and statistics. Four major elements define an encyclopedia: its subject matter, its scope, its method of organization, and its method of production: Encyclopedias can be general, containing articles on topics in every field (the English-language Encyclopædia Britannica and German Brockhaus are well-known examples). General encyclopedias often contain guides on how to do a variety of things, as well as embedded dictionaries and gazetteers.[citation needed] There are also encyclopedias that cover a wide variety of topics but from a particular cultural, ethnic, or national perspective, such as the Great Soviet Encyclopedia or Encyclopaedia Judaica. Works of encyclopedic scope aim to convey the important accumulated knowledge for their subject domain, such as an encyclopedia of medicine, philosophy, or law. Works vary in the breadth of material and the depth of discussion, depending on the target audience. (For example, the Medical encyclopedia produced by A.D.A.M., Inc. for the U.S. National Institutes of Health.) Some systematic method of organization is essential to making an encyclopedia usable as a work of reference. There have historically been two main methods of organizing printed encyclopedias: the alphabetical method (consisting of a number of separate articles, organized in alphabetical order), or organization by hierarchical categories. The former method is today the most common by far, especially for general works. The fluidity of electronic media, however, allows new possibilities for multiple methods of organization of the same content. Further, electronic media offer previously unimaginable capabilities for search, indexing and cross reference. The epigraph from Horace on the title page of the 18th century Encyclopédie suggests the importance of the structure of an encyclopedia: "What grace may be added to commonplace matters by the power of order and connection." As modern multimedia and the information age have evolved, they have had an ever-increasing effect on the collection, verification, summation, and presentation of information of all kinds. Projects such as Everything2, Encarta, h2g2, and Wikipedia are examples of new forms of the encyclopedia as information retrieval becomes simpler. The method of production for an encyclopedia historically has been supported in both for-profit and non-profit contexts. The Great Soviet Encyclopedia mentioned above was entirely state sponsored, while the Britannica was supported as a for-profit institution. By comparison, Wikipedia is supported by volunteers contributing in a non-profit environment under the organization of the Wikimedia Foundation. Some works entitled "dictionaries" are actually similar to encyclopedias, especially those concerned with a particular field (such as the Dictionary of the Middle Ages, the Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships, and Black's Law Dictionary). The Macquarie Dictionary, Australia's national dictionary, became an encyclopedic dictionary after its first edition in recognition of the use of proper nouns in common communication, and the words derived from such proper nouns. There are some broad differences between encyclopedias and dictionaries. Most noticeably, encyclopedia articles are longer, fuller and more thorough than entries in most general-purpose dictionaries.[3][17] There are differences in content as well. Generally speaking, dictionaries provide linguistic information about words themselves, while encyclopedias focus more on the thing for which those words stand.[4][5][6][7] Thus, while dictionary entries are inextricably fixed to the word described, encyclopedia articles can be given a different entry name. As such, dictionary entries are not fully translatable into other languages, but encyclopedia articles can be.[4] In practice, however, the distinction is not concrete, as there is no clear-cut difference between factual, "encyclopedic" information and linguistic information such as appears in dictionaries.[6][17][18] Thus encyclopedias may contain material that is also found in dictionaries, and vice versa.[18] In particular, dictionary entries often contain factual information about the thing named by the word.[17][18] History Main article: History of encyclopedias Encyclopedias have progressed from the beginning of history in written form, through medieval and modern times in print, and most recently, displayed on computer and distributed via computer networks. Ancient times Naturalis Historiæ, 1669 edition, title page One of the earliest encyclopedic works to have survived to modern times is the Naturalis Historia of Pliny the Elder, a Roman statesman living in the 1st century AD. He compiled a work of 37 chapters covering natural history, architecture, medicine, geography, geology, and all aspects of the world around him. He stated in the preface that he had compiled 20,000 facts from 2000 works by over 200 authors, and added many others from his own experience. The work was published around AD 77-79, although he probably never finished proofing the work before his death in the eruption of Vesuvius in AD 79.[19] Middle Ages Isidore of Seville, one of the greatest scholars of the early Middle Ages, is widely recognized for writing the first encyclopedia of the Middle Ages, the Etymologiae (The Etymologies) or Origines (around 630), in which he compiled a sizable portion of the learning available at his time, both ancient and contemporary. The work has 448 chapters in 20 volumes, and is valuable because of the quotes and fragments of texts by other authors that would have been lost had he not collected them. The most popular encyclopedia of the Carolingian Age was the De universo or De rerum naturis by Rabanus Maurus, written about 830; it was based on Etymologiae.[citation needed] The encyclopedia of Suda, a massive 10th-century Byzantine encyclopedia, had 30 000 entries, many drawing from ancient sources that have since been lost, and often derived from medieval Christian compilers. The text was arranged alphabetically with some slight deviations from common vowel order and place in the Greek alphabet. The early Muslim compilations of knowledge in the Middle Ages included many comprehensive works. Around year 960, the Brethren of Purity of Basra[20] were engaged in their Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity. Notable works include Abu Bakr al-Razi's encyclopedia of science, the Mutazilite Al-Kindi's prolific output of 270 books, and Ibn Sina's medical encyclopedia, which was a standard reference work for centuries. Also notable are works of universal history (or sociology) from Asharites, al-Tabri, al-Masudi, Tabari's History of the Prophets and Kings, Ibn Rustah, al-Athir, and Ibn Khaldun, whose Muqadimmah contains cautions regarding trust in written records that remain wholly applicable today. The enormous encyclopedic work in China of the Four Great Books of Song, compiled by the 11th century AD during the early Song dynasty (960–1279), was a massive literary undertaking for the time. The last encyclopedia of the four, the Prime Tortoise of the Record Bureau, amounted to 9.4 million Chinese characters in 1000 written volumes. In the late Middle Ages, several authors had the ambition of compiling the sum of human knowledge in a certain field or overall, for example Bartholomew of England, Vincent of Beauvais, Radulfus Ardens, Sydrac, Brunetto Latini, Giovanni da Sangiminiano, Pierre Bersuire. Some were women, like Hildegard of Bingen and Herrad of Landsberg. The most successful of those publications were the Speculum maius (Great Mirror) of Vincent of Beauvais and the De proprietatibus rerum (On the Properties of Things) by Bartholomew of England. The latter was translated (or adapted) into French, Provençal, Italian, English, Flemish, Anglo-Norman, Spanish, and German during the Middle Ages. Both were written in the middle of the 13th century. No medieval encyclopedia bore the title Encyclopaedia – they were often called On nature (De natura, De naturis rerum), Mirror (Speculum maius, Speculum universale), Treasure (Trésor).[21] Renaissance Anatomy in Margarita Philosophica, 1565 These works were all hand copied and thus rarely available, beyond wealthy patrons or monastic men of learning: they were expensive, and usually written for those extending knowledge rather than those using it.[22] During the Renaissance, the creation of printing allowed a wider diffusion of encyclopedias and every scholar could have his or her own copy. The De expetendis et fugiendis rebus by Giorgio Valla was posthumously printed in 1501 by Aldo Manuzio in Venice. This work followed the traditional scheme of liberal arts. However, Valla added the translation of ancient Greek works on mathematics (firstly by Archimedes), newly discovered and translated. The Margarita Philosophica by Gregor Reisch, printed in 1503, was a complete encyclopedia explaining the seven liberal arts. The term encyclopaedia was coined by 16th century humanists who misread copies of their texts of Pliny and Quintilian, and combined the two Greek words "enkyklios paideia" into one word, ??????????????.[23] The phrase enkyklios paideia (????????? ???????) was used by Plutarch and the Latin word Encyclopedia came from him. The first work titled in this way was the Encyclopedia orbisque doctrinarum, hoc est omnium artium, scientiarum, ipsius philosophiae index ac divisio written by Johannes Aventinus in 1517.[citation needed] The English physician and philosopher, Sir Thomas Browne used the word 'encyclopaedia' in 1646 in the preface to the reader to define his Pseudodoxia Epidemica, a major work of the 17th-century scientific revolution. Browne structured his encyclopaedia upon the time-honoured schemata of the Renaissance, the so-called 'scale of creation' which ascends through the mineral, vegetable, animal, human, planetary, and cosmological worlds. Pseudodoxia Epidemica was a European best-seller, translated into French, Dutch, and German as well as Latin it went through no fewer than five editions, each revised and augmented, the last edition appearing in 1672. Factors that changed the size of encyclopedias were financial, commercial, legal, and intellectual. During the Renaissance, middle classes were having more time to read and encyclopedias helped them to learn more. Publishers were wanting to increase their output so some countries like Germany start selling books that were missing alphabetical sections to publish faster. Also, publishers could not afford all the resources by themselves so they multiple publishers would come together with their resources to create better encyclopedias. Soon it was difficult financially to continue to produce the amount they wanted to produce so then subscriptions and serial publications were made. This was risky for publishers because they had to find people that would pay all upfront or make payments. When this did work out capital would rise and there would be a steady income for encyclopedias. Later rivalry grew causing copyright to occur due to weak underdeveloped laws. Some publishers would copy another publisher’s work to produce an encyclopedia faster and cheaper so consumers did not have to pay a lot and they would sell more. Encyclopedias made it to where middle class citizens could basically have a small library in their own house. Europeans were becoming more curious about their society around them causing them to revolt against their government.[24] 18th–19th centuries Encyclopédie, 1773 The beginnings of the modern idea of the general-purpose, widely distributed printed encyclopedia precede the 18th century encyclopedists. However, Chambers' Cyclopaedia, or Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences (1728), and the Encyclopédie of Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert (1751 onwards), as well as Encyclopædia Britannica and the Conversations-Lexikon, were the first to realize the form we would recognize today, with a comprehensive scope of topics, discussed in depth and organized in an accessible, systematic method. Chambers, in 1728, followed the earlier lead of John Harris's Lexicon Technicum of 1704 and later editions (see also below); this work was by its title and content "A Universal English Dictionary of Arts and Sciences: Explaining not only the Terms of Art, but the Arts Themselves". During the 19th and early 20th century, many smaller or less developed languages[which?] saw their first encyclopedias, using French, German, and English role models. While encyclopedias in larger languages, having large markets that could support a large editorial staff, churned out new 20-volume works in a few years and new editions with brief intervals, such publication plans often spanned a decade or more in smaller languages.[citation needed] 20th century 1913 advertisement for Encyclopædia Britannica, the oldest and one of the largest contemporary English encyclopedias Popular and affordable encyclopedias such as Harmsworth's Universal Encyclopaedia and the Children's Encyclopaedia appeared in the early 1920s. In the United States, the 1950s and 1960s saw the introduction of several large popular encyclopedias, often sold on installment plans. The best known of these were World Book and Funk and Wagnalls. The second half of the 20th century also saw the proliferation of specialized encyclopedias that compiled topics in specific fields. This trend has continued. Encyclopedias of at least one volume in size now exist for most if not all academic disciplines, including such narrow topics such as bioethics. By the late 20th century, encyclopedias were being published on CD-ROMs for use with personal computers. Microsoft's Encarta, launched in 1993, was a landmark example as it had no printed equivalent. Articles were supplemented with both video and audio files as well as numerous high-quality images. After sixteen years, Microsoft discontinued the Encarta line of products in 2009.[25] 21st century In 2001, Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger launched Wikipedia, a collaboratively edited, multilingual, open-source, free Internet encyclopedia supported by the non-profit Wikimedia Foundation. As of 23 April 2017, there are 5,391,001 articles in the English Wikipedia. There are 287 different editions of Wikipedia. As of February 2014, it had 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors each month.[26] Wikipedia has more than 25 million accounts, out of which there were over 118,000 active editors globally, as of August 2015. Wikipedia's accuracy was found by a Nature study to be close to that of Encyclopædia Britannica,[27] with Wikipedia being much larger. However, critics argue Wikipedia exhibits systemic bias,[28][29] and its group dynamics hinder its goals.[clarification needed] Many academics, historians, teachers, and journalists reject Wikipedia as a reliable source of information, primarily for being a mixture of truths, half truths, and some falsehoods, and that as a resource about many controversial topics, is notoriously subject to manipulation and spin.[citation needed] While Wikipedia is by far the largest web-based encyclopedia, it is not the only one in existence. There are several much smaller, usually more specialized, encyclopedias on various themes, sometimes dedicated to a specific geographic region or time period.[30] See also Bibliography of encyclopedias Biographical dictionary Encyclopedic knowledge Encyclopedism Fictitious entry History of science and technology Lexicography Library science Lists of encyclopedias Thesaurus Speculum literature Portals Access related topics Literature portal Library and information science portal Education portal Notes ^ "encyclopaedia" (online). Oxford English Dictionary (OED.com), Oxford University Press. Retrieved February 18, 2012.  ^ "Encyclopedia.". Archived from the original on August 3, 2007.  Glossary of Library Terms. Riverside City College, Digital Library/Learning Resource Center. Retrieved on: November 17, 2007. ^ a b c Hartmann, R. R. K.; James, Gregory; James, Gregory (1998). Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge. p. 48. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010.  ^ a b c Béjoint, Henri (2000). Modern Lexicography, pp. 30–31. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-829951-6 ^ a b "Encyclopaedia". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved July 27, 2010. An English lexicographer, H.W. Fowler, wrote in the preface to the first edition (1911) of The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Current English language that a dictionary is concerned with the uses of words and phrases and with giving information about the things for which they stand only so far as current use of the words depends upon knowledge of those things. The emphasis in an encyclopedia is much more on the nature of the things for which the words and phrases stand.  ^ a b c Hartmann, R. R. K.; Gregory, James (1998). Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge. p. 49. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010. In contrast with linguistic information, encyclopedia material is more concerned with the description of objective realities than the words or phrases that refer to them. In practice, however, there is no hard and fast boundary between factual and lexical knowledge.  ^ a b Cowie, Anthony Paul (2009). The Oxford History of English Lexicography, Volume I. Oxford University Press. p. 22. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved August 17, 2010. An 'encyclopedia' (encyclopaedia) usually gives more information than a dictionary; it explains not only the words but also the things and concepts referred to by the words.  ^ ????????? ???????, Quintilian, Institutio Oratoria, 1.10.1, at Perseus Project ^ ?????????, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon, at Perseus Project ^ ???????, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon, at Perseus Project ^ According to some accounts, such as the American Heritage Dictionary, copyists of Latin manuscripts took this phrase to be a single Greek word, ?????????????? enkyklopaidia. ^ Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert Encyclopédie. University of Michigan Library:Scholarly Publishing Office and DLXS. Retrieved on: November 17, 2007 ^ Roest, Bert (1997). "Compilation as Theme and Praxis in Franciscan Universal Chronicles". In Peter Binkley. Pre-Modern Encyclopaedic Texts: Proceedings of the Second Comers Congress, Groningen, 1 – July 4, 1996. BRILL. p. 213. ISBN 90-04-10830-0.  ^ Carey, Sorcha (2003). "Two Strategies of Encyclopaedism". Pliny's Catalogue of Culture: Art and Empire in the Natural History. Oxford University Press. p. 17. ISBN 0-19-925913-5.  ^ "encyclopaedia", Chambers Reference Online; "encyclopaedia"[dead link], AskOxford. ^ "encyclopaedia" Archived February 17, 2009, at the Wayback Machine., Bartleby.com; "Encyclopaedia", Merriam Webster."Archived copy". Archived from the original on February 17, 2009. Retrieved 2006-12-12.  CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) ^ a b c Hartmann, R. R. K.; James, Gregory; James, Gregory (1998). "Encyclopedic definition". Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge: 48–49. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010. Usually these two aspects overlap – encyclopedic information being difficult to distinguish from linguistic information – and dictionaries attempt to capture both in the explanation of a meaning...  ^ a b c Béjoint, Henri (2000). Modern Lexicography. Oxford University Press. p. 31. ISBN 0-19-829951-6. The two types, as we have seen, are not easily differentiated; encyclopedias contain information that is also to be found in dictionaries, and vice versa.  ^ Naturalis Historia ^ P.D. Wightman (1953), The Growth of Scientific Ideas ^ Monique Paulmier-Foucart, "Medieval Encyclopaedias", in André Vauchez (ed.), Encyclopedia of the Middle Ages, James Clarke & Co, 2002. ^ See "Encyclopedia" in Dictionary of the Middle Ages. ^ ??????????????, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon, at Perseus Project: "f. l. [= falsa lectio, Latin for "false reading"] for ????????? ???????" ^ Loveland, J. (2012). "Why Encyclopedias Got Bigger … and Smaller". Information & Culture. 47 (2): 233–254. doi:10.1353/lac.2012.0012.  ^ Important Notice: MSN Encarta to be Discontinued. MSN Encarta. Archived from the original on October 31, 2009.  ^ Cohen, Noam (February 9, 2014). "Wikipedia vs. the Small Screen". New York Times.  ^ Giles, Jim (December 2005). "Internet encyclopedias go head to head". Nature. 438 (7070): 900–901. Bibcode:2005Natur.438..900G. doi:10.1038/438900a. PMID 16355180. (subscription required) Note: The study was cited in several news articles; e.g.: "Wikipedia survives research test". BBC News. December 15, 2005.  ^ "Gender Bias in Wikipedia and Britannica". Retrieved June 2, 2015.  ^ "Analyzing and visualizing the semantic coverage of Wikipedia and its authors". Complexity. 12: 30–40. doi:10.1002/cplx.20164. Retrieved June 2, 2015.  ^ Sideris A., "The Encyclopedic Concept in the Web Era", in Ioannides M., Arnold D., Niccolucci F. and K. Mania (eds.), The e-volution of Information Communication Technology in Cultural Heritage. Where Hi-Tech Touches the Past: Risks and Challenges for the 21st Century. VAST 2006, Epoch, Budapest 2006, pp. 192-197. ISBN 963-8046-74-0. References EtymologyOnline "Encyclopaedia". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved July 27, 2010.  Béjoint, Henri (2000). Modern Lexicography. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-829951-6.  C. Codoner, S. Louis, M. Paulmier-Foucart, D. Hüe, M. Salvat, A. Llinares, L'Encyclopédisme. Actes du Colloque de Caen, A. Becq (dir.), Paris, 1991. Bergenholtz, H.; Nielsen, S.; Tarp, S., eds. (2009). Lexicography at a Crossroads: Dictionaries and Encyclopedias Today, Lexicographical Tools Tomorrow. Peter Lang. ISBN 978-3-03911-799-4.  Blom, Phillip (2004). Enlightening the World: Encyclopédie, the Book that Changed the Course of History. New York; Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-4039-6895-1. OCLC 57669780.  Collison, Robert Lewis (1966). Encyclopaedias: Their History Throughout the Ages (2nd ed.). New York, London: Hafner. OCLC 220101699.  Cowie, Anthony Paul (2009). The Oxford History of English Lexicography, Volume I. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved August 17, 2010.  Darnton, Robert (1979). The business of enlightenment : a publishing history of the Encyclopédie, 1775–1800. Cambridge: Belknap Press. ISBN 0-674-08785-2.  Hartmann, R. R. K.; James, Gregory; James, Gregory (1998). Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010.  Kafker, Frank A., ed. (1981). Notable encyclopedias of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries: nine predecessors of the Encyclopédie. Oxford: Voltaire Foundation. ISBN 978-0-7294-0256-9. OCLC 10645788.  Kafker, Frank A., ed. (1994). Notable encyclopedias of the late eighteenth century: eleven successors of the Encyclopédie. Oxford: Voltaire Foundation. ISBN 978-0-7294-0467-9. OCLC 30787125.  Needham, Joseph (1986). "Part 7, Military Technology; the Gunpowder Epic". Science and Civilization in China. 5 – Chemistry and Chemical Technology. Taipei: Caves Books Ltd. ISBN 978-0-521-30358-3. OCLC 59245877.  Rosenzweig, Roy (June 2006). "Can History Be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the Past". Journal of American History. 93 (1): 117–46. doi:10.2307/4486062. ISSN 1945-2314. Archived from the original on April 25, 2010.  Sideris, Athanasios (2006). "The Encyclopedic Concept in the Web Era", in Ioannides M., Arnold D., Niccolucci F. and K. Mania (eds.), The e-volution of Information Communication Technology in Cultural Heritage. Where Hi-Tech Touches the Past: Risks and Challenges for the 21st Century. VAST 2006, Epoch, Budapest, pp. 192–197. ISBN 963-8046-74-0. Walsh, S. Padraig (1968). Anglo-American general encyclopedias: a historical bibliography, 1703–1967. New York: Bowker. p. 270. OCLC 577541.  Yeo, Richard R. (2001). Encyclopaedic visions : scientific dictionaries and enlightenment culture. Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-65191-2. OCLC 45828872.  External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Encyclopedias. Look up encyclopedia, encyclopaedia, or encyclopedic in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikisource has original works on the topic: Encyclopedias Encyclopaedia and Hypertext Internet Accuracy Project – Biographical errors in encyclopedias and almanacs Encyclopedia – Diderot's article on the Encyclopedia from the original Encyclopédie. De expetendis et fugiendis rebus – First Renaissance encyclopedia Errors and inconsistencies in several printed reference books and encyclopedias Archived July 18, 2001, at the Wayback Machine. Digital encyclopedias put the world at your fingertips – CNET article Encyclopedias online University of Wisconsin – Stout listing by category Chambers' Cyclopaedia, 1728, with the 1753 supplement Encyclopædia Americana, 1851, Francis Lieber ed. (Boston: Mussey & Co.) at the University of Michigan Making of America site Encyclopædia Britannica, articles and illustrations from 9th ed., 1875–89, and 10th ed., 1902–03. Texts on Wikisource: "Cyclopædia". Collier's New Encyclopedia. 1921.  "Encyclopædia". Encyclopedia Americana. 1920.  "Encyclopædia". The New Student's Reference Work. 1914.  "Encyclopaedia". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.  "Encyclopædia". The Nuttall Encyclopædia. 1907.  "Encyclopædia". New International Encyclopedia. 1905.  "Cyclopædia". The American Cyclopædia. 1879.  Authority control GND: 4014986-9 NDL: 00563841 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Encyclopedia&oldid=774134996" Categories: Encyclopedias Works about history Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2016 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown Pages containing links to subscription-only content Pages using ISBN magic links Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use mdy dates from February 2016 Articles to be expanded from December 2015 All articles to be expanded Featured articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Articles containing Ancient Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Collier's Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW with an wstitle parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Nuttall Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans Akan Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti Asturianu ???? Az?rbaycanca Bamanankan ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski Eesti ???????? Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ??? Hawai?i ??????? ?????? Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ????? / ????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Ladino ????? ??? Latga?u Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Limburgs Lumbaart Magyar ?????????? Malagasy ?????? Malti ????? ????????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-d??ng-ng?? Mirandés ?????? ?????????? N?huatl Nederlands Nedersaksies ?????? ??? Napulitano ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan ???? ????? ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ?????? Papiamentu ???? ????????? Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski ???????? Português Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? ????????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????????? / ?????????? ?l?nski ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ?????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? ???????? / Uyghurche Vèneto Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Walon ?? Winaray Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?????? ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 6 April 2017, at 14:10. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Introduction |||Wikipedia:Introduction From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Help:Contents Introduction   Learn more about editing   Explore Wikipedia   Tutorial What is Wikipedia? Play media A short video about the satisfaction editors get from contributing Wikipedia is a free encyclopedia, written collaboratively by the people who use it. It is a special type of website designed to make collaboration easy, called a wiki. Many people are constantly improving Wikipedia, making thousands of changes per hour. All of these changes are recorded in article histories and recent changes. For a more detailed account of the project, see About Wikipedia. How you can contribute Click "Edit" to change an article Play media Editing tutorial for Wikipedia Don't be afraid to edit – anyone can edit almost every page, and we are encouraged to be bold! Find something that can be improved and make it better—for example, spelling, grammar, rewriting for readability, adding content, or removing non-constructive edits. If you wish to add new facts, please try to provide references so they may be verified, or suggest them on the article's discussion page. Changes to controversial topics and Wikipedia's main pages should usually be discussed first. Contributing to Wikipedia will provide you with resources on all the basics needed to use, comment on, and contribute to Wikipedia. Remember – you can't break Wikipedia; all edits can be reversed, fixed or improved later. Wikipedia is allowed to be imperfect. So go ahead, edit an article and help make Wikipedia the best information source on the Internet! Donate – Wikipedia is free to use, but relies on donations and grants to do so. Please consider donating using the Donate to Wikipedia link on the left to help with the project's running costs and expansion. Why not try out the editor right now? Click here to edit the sandbox, a place to make test edits. (If there is already some text there, add to the end of the text.) Type some text. Click Show preview to test your changes, or Save page when you're happy with the way it looks. Next: Learn more about editing ? Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Introduction&oldid=680454568" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia quick introductions Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Afrikaans Alemannisch Ænglisc ??????? ??????? ???? ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski ?????? Català Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ??????? ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano ????? Kapampangan ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî Ladino ??? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Limburgs Magyar ?????????? ?????? ???? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ??? Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ???? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Romani Runa Simi ??????? Sámegiella ????????? Sardu Scots Sicilianu Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ??? Türkçe ?????? ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 10 September 2015, at 23:28. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:Statistics |||Statistics Jump to: navigation, search Page statistics Content pages 5,393,675 Pages (All pages in the wiki, including talk pages, redirects, etc.) 41,989,773 Uploaded files 844,764 Edit statistics Page edits since Wikipedia was set up 886,655,875 Average edits per page 21.12 User statistics Registered users 30,796,048 Active registered users (list of members) (Users who have performed an action in the last 30 days) 135,691 Bots (list of members) 314 Administrators (list of members) 1,263 Bureaucrats (list of members) 22 Pending changes reviewers (list of members) 6,772 Stewards (list of members) 0 Account creators (list of members) 342 Importers (list of members) 2 Transwiki importers (list of members) 0 IP block exemptions (list of members) 164 Oversighters (list of members) 50 Founder (list of members) 1 Rollbackers (list of members) 5,723 Autopatrolled (list of members) 3,647 Researchers (list of members) 10 File movers (list of members) 397 Checkusers (list of members) 39 Template editors (list of members) 154 Mass message senders (list of members) 47 Extended confirmed users (list of members) 33,796 Page movers (list of members) 132 New page reviewers (list of members) 392 Edit filter managers (list of members) 169 Confirmed users (list of members) 481 Course coordinators (list of members) 24 Course online volunteers (list of members) 91 Course campus volunteers (list of members) 104 Course instructors (list of members) 215 Other statistics Queued mass messages 0 Other statistics Internal statistics See here for the job queue statistic ("jobs") Special:ValidationStatistics: Pending changes statistics See also Wikipedia:Statistics and Category:Wikipedia statistics for a fuller list of pages that provide, analyze or discuss Wikipedia statistics. External statistics Most viewed pages Site traffic statistics Article traffic statistics Wikipedia Statistics - Tables - English Alexa traffic analysis for Wikipedia Wikipedia.org is more popular than... Other Wikipedias Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:Statistics" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Special page Variants Views More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools Upload file Special pages Printable version Languages Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/English_language |||English language From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For other uses, see English (disambiguation). English Pronunciation /????l??/[1] Region Originally England now worldwide (see Geographical distribution, below) Native speakers 360–400 million (2006)[2] L2 speakers: 400 million; as a foreign language: 600–700 million[2] Language family Indo-European Germanic West Germanic Ingvaeonic Anglo-Frisian Anglic English Early forms Old English Middle English Early Modern English Writing system Latin script (English alphabet) English Braille, Unified English Braille Signed forms Manually coded English (multiple systems) Official status Official language in 67 countries 27 non-sovereign entities Various organisations United Nations European Union Commonwealth of Nations Council of Europe ICC IOC ISO NATO WTO NAFTA OAS OECD OIC OPEC GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development* PIF UKUSA Agreement ASEAN ASEAN Economic Community SAARC Turkic Council ECO Language codes ISO 639-1 en ISO 639-2 eng ISO 639-3 eng Glottolog stan1293[3] Linguasphere 52-ABA   Countries of the world where English is a majority native language   Countries where English is official but not a majority native language This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. English i/????l??/ is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and is now the global lingua franca.[4][5] Named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to England, it ultimately derives its name from the Anglia (Angeln) peninsula in the Baltic Sea. It is most closely related to the Frisian languages, but its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages in the early medieval period, and later by Romance languages, particularly Latin and French.[6] English is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. It is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland, and New Zealand, and is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa, and South Asia.[7] It is the third most common native language in the world, after Mandarin and Spanish.[8] It is the most widely learned second language and an official language of the United Nations, of the European Union, and of many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a set of Anglo-Frisian dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the fifth century, are called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England, and was a period in which the language was influenced by French.[9] Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London and the King James Bible, and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.[10] Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, modern English spread around the world from the 17th to mid-20th centuries. Through all types of printed and electronic media, as well as the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and in professional contexts such as science, navigation, and law.[11] Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax.[12] Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. Despite noticeable variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions – in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar and spelling – English-speakers from around the world are able to communicate with one another with relative ease. Contents 1 Classification 2 History 2.1 Proto-Germanic to Old English 2.2 Middle English 2.3 Early Modern English 2.4 Spread of Modern English 3 Geographical distribution 3.1 Three circles of English-speaking countries 3.2 Pluricentric English 3.3 English as a global language 4 Phonology 4.1 Consonants 4.2 Vowels 4.3 Phonotactics 4.4 Stress, rhythm and intonation 4.5 Regional variation 5 Grammar 5.1 Nouns and noun phrases 5.1.1 Adjectives 5.1.2 Pronouns, case and person 5.1.3 Prepositions 5.2 Verbs and verb phrases 5.2.1 Tense, aspect and mood 5.2.2 Phrasal verbs 5.2.3 Adverbs 5.3 Syntax 5.3.1 Basic constituent order 5.3.2 Clause syntax 5.3.3 Auxiliary verb constructions 5.3.4 Questions 5.3.5 Discourse level syntax 6 Vocabulary 6.1 Word formation processes 6.2 Word origins 6.3 English loanwords and calques in other languages 7 Writing system 8 Dialects, accents, and varieties 8.1 UK and Ireland 8.2 North America 8.3 Australia and New Zealand 8.4 Africa, the Caribbean, and South Asia 9 References 10 Bibliography 11 External links Classification The Germanic languages in Europe The Anglo-Frisian languages   English   Scots   West Frisian   North Frisian   Saterland Frisian Phylogenetic tree showing the historical relations between the languages of the West Germanic branch of the Germanic languages English is an Indo-European language, and belongs to the West Germanic group of the Germanic languages.[13] Most closely related to English are the three Frisian languages: West Frisian, North Frisian and Saterland Frisian, with which English forms the Anglo-Frisian subgroup within West Germanic. Low German (Low Saxon) (nr. 19-24 on the map), which evolved from Old Saxon, is also closely related, and sometimes Low German, English, and Frisian are grouped together as the Ingvaeonic (North Sea Germanic) languages.[14] Furthermore, English is closely related to German, Dutch and Afrikaans. While Dutch and Afrikaans are classified as Franconian languages (nr. 25, 29 and 32), Standard German is based on Thuringian-Upper Saxon dialects (nr. 30), and therefore is more closely related to the North Sea Germanic languages. Since the Central German dialects (nr. 29-31) Standard German is based on, were, other than English, Dutch and Afrikaans (and also Low German), affected by the High German consonant shift, German seems more distantly related to English than Dutch and Afrikaans, since cognates often are not so easily recognizable, but still, English and German resemble each other to a high degree: English: The white wise flying ghost was friendly and his best friend was the green frog who sat under the elm and sang. German: Der weiße weise fliegende Geist war freundlich und sein bester Freund war der grüne Frosch der unter der Ulme saß und sang. Modern English descends from Middle English, which in turn descends from Old English.[15] Particular dialects of Old and Middle English also developed into a number of other English (Anglic) languages, including Scots[16] and the extinct Fingallian and Forth and Bargy (Yola) dialects of Ireland.[17] English is classified as a Germanic language because it shares new language features (different from other Indo-European languages) with other Germanic languages such as Dutch, German, and Swedish.[18] These shared innovations show that the languages have descended from a single common ancestor, which linguists call Proto-Germanic. Some shared features of Germanic languages are the use of modal verbs, the division of verbs into strong and weak classes, and the sound changes affecting Proto-Indo-European consonants, known as Grimm's and Verner's laws. Through Grimm's law, the word for foot begins with /f/ in Germanic languages, but its cognates in other Indo-European languages begin with /p/. English is classified as an Anglo-Frisian language because Frisian and English share other features, such as the palatalisation of consonants that were velar consonants in Proto-Germanic (see Phonological history of Old English § Palatalization).[19] English sing, sang, sung; Dutch zingen, zong, gezongen; German singen, sang, gesungen (strong verb) English laugh, laughed; Dutch and German lachen, lachte (weak verb) English foot, Dutch voet, German Fuß, Norwegian and Swedish fot (initial /f/ derived from Proto-Indo-European *p through Grimm's law) Latin pes, stem ped-; Modern Greek ???? pódi; Russian ??? pod; Sanskrit ??? pád (original Proto-Indo-European *p) English cheese, Frisian tsiis (ch and ts from palatalisation) German Käse and Dutch kaas (k without palatalisation) English, like the other insular Germanic languages, Icelandic and Faroese, developed independently of the continental Germanic languages and their influences. English is thus not mutually intelligible with any continental Germanic language, differing in vocabulary, syntax, and phonology, although some, such as Dutch, do show strong affinities with English, especially with its earlier stages.[20] Because English through its history has changed considerably in response to contact with other languages, particularly Old Norse and Norman French, some scholars have argued that English can be considered a mixed language or a creole – a theory called the Middle English creole hypothesis. Although the high degree of influence from these languages on the vocabulary and grammar of Modern English is widely acknowledged, most specialists in language contact do not consider English to be a true mixed language.[21][22] History Main article: History of the English language Proto-Germanic to Old English Main article: Old English The opening to the Old English epic poem Beowulf, handwritten in half-uncial script: H?æt ?? G?rde/na ing?ar dagum þ?od cyninga / þrym ge frunon... "Listen! We of the Spear-Danes from days of yore have heard of the glory of the folk-kings..." The earliest form of English is called Old English or Anglo-Saxon (c. 550–1066 CE). Old English developed from a set of North Sea Germanic dialects originally spoken along the coasts of Frisia, Lower Saxony, Jutland, and Southern Sweden by Germanic tribes known as the Angles, Saxons, and Jutes. In the fifth century, the Anglo-Saxons settled Britain and the Romans withdrew from Britain. By the seventh century, the Germanic language of the Anglo-Saxons became dominant in Britain, replacing the languages of Roman Britain (43–409 CE): Common Brittonic, a Celtic language, and Latin, brought to Britain by the Roman occupation.[23][24][25] England and English (originally Ænglaland and Ænglisc) are named after the Angles.[26] Old English was divided into four dialects: the Anglian dialects, Mercian and Northumbrian, and the Saxon dialects, Kentish and West Saxon.[27] Through the educational reforms of King Alfred in the ninth century and the influence of the kingdom of Wessex, the West Saxon dialect became the standard written variety.[28] The epic poem Beowulf is written in West Saxon, and the earliest English poem, Cædmon's Hymn, is written in Northumbrian.[29] Modern English developed mainly from Mercian, but the Scots language developed from Northumbrian. A few short inscriptions from the early period of Old English were written using a runic script.[30] By the sixth century, a Latin alphabet was adopted, written with half-uncial letterforms. It included the runic letters wynn ??? and thorn ?þ?, and the modified Latin letters eth ?ð?, and ash ?æ?.[30][31] Old English is very different from Modern English and difficult for 21st-century English speakers to understand. Its grammar was similar to that of modern German, and its closest relative is Old Frisian. Nouns, adjectives, pronouns, and verbs had many more inflectional endings and forms, and word order was much freer than in Modern English. Modern English has case forms in pronouns (he, him, his) and a few verb endings (I have, he has), but Old English had case endings in nouns as well, and verbs had more person and number endings.[32][33][34] The translation of Matthew 8:20 from 1000 CE shows examples of case endings (nominative plural, accusative plural, genitive singular) and a verb ending (present plural): Foxas habbað holu and heofonan fuglas nest Fox-as habb-að hol-u and heofon-an fugl-as nest-? fox-NOM.PL have-PRS.PL hole-ACC.PL and heaven-GEN.SG bird-NOM.PL nest-ACC.PL "Foxes have holes and the birds of heaven nests"[35] Middle English Main article: Middle English Englischmen þeyz hy hadde fram þe bygynnyng þre manner speche, Souþeron, Northeron, and Myddel speche in þe myddel of þe lond, … Noþeles by comyxstion and mellyng, furst wiþ Danes, and afterward wiþ Normans, in menye þe contray longage ys asperyed, and som vseþ strange wlaffyng, chyteryng, harryng, and garryng grisbytting. Although, from the beginning, Englishmen had three manners of speaking, southern, northern and midlands speech in the middle of the country, … Nevertheless, through intermingling and mixing, first with Danes and then with Normans, amongst many the country language has arisen, and some use strange stammering, chattering, snarling, and grating gnashing. “ ” John of Trevisa, ca. 1385[36] In the period from the 8th to the 12th century, Old English gradually transformed through language contact into Middle English. Middle English is often arbitrarily defined as beginning with the conquest of England by William the Conqueror in 1066, but it developed further in the period from 1200–1450. First, the waves of Norse colonisation of northern parts of the British Isles in the 8th and 9th centuries put Old English into intense contact with Old Norse, a North Germanic language. Norse influence was strongest in the Northeastern varieties of Old English spoken in the Danelaw area around York, which was the centre of Norse colonisation; today these features are still particularly present in Scots and Northern English. However the centre of norsified English seems to have been in the Midlands around Lindsey, and after 920 CE when Lindsey was reincorporated into the Anglo-Saxon polity, Norse features spread from there into English varieties that had not been in intense contact with Norse speakers. Some elements of Norse influence that persist in all English varieties today are the pronouns beginning with th- (they, them, their) which replaced the Anglo-Saxon pronouns with h- (hie, him, hera).[37] With the Norman conquest of England in 1066, the now norsified Old English language was subject to contact with the Old Norman language, a Romance language closely related to Modern French. The Norman language in England eventually developed into Anglo-Norman. Because Norman was spoken primarily by the elites and nobles, while the lower classes continued speaking Anglo-Saxon, the influence of Norman consisted of introducing a wide range of loanwords related to politics, legislation and prestigious social domains.[38] Middle English also greatly simplified the inflectional system, probably in order to reconcile Old Norse and Old English, which were inflectionally different but morphologically similar. The distinction between nominative and accusative case was lost except in personal pronouns, the instrumental case was dropped, and the use of the genitive case was limited to describing possession. The inflectional system regularised many irregular inflectional forms,[39] and gradually simplified the system of agreement, making word order less flexible.[40] By the Wycliffe Bible of the 1380s, the passage Matthew 8:20 was written Foxis han dennes, and briddis of heuene han nestis[41] Here the plural suffix -n on the verb have is still retained, but none of the case endings on the nouns are present. By the 12th century Middle English was fully developed, integrating both Norse and Norman features; it continued to be spoken until the transition to early Modern English around 1500. Middle English literature includes Geoffrey Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales, and Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur. In the Middle English period the use of regional dialects in writing proliferated, and dialect traits were even used for effect by authors such as Chaucer. Early Modern English Main article: Early Modern English Graphic representation of the Great Vowel Shift, showing how the pronunciation of the long vowels gradually shifted, with the high vowels i: and u: breaking into diphthongs and the lower vowels each shifting their pronunciation up one level The next period in the history of English was Early Modern English (1500–1700). Early Modern English was characterised by the Great Vowel Shift (1350–1700), inflectional simplification, and linguistic standardisation. The Great Vowel Shift affected the stressed long vowels of Middle English. It was a chain shift, meaning that each shift triggered a subsequent shift in the vowel system. Mid and open vowels were raised, and close vowels were broken into diphthongs. For example, the word bite was originally pronounced as the word beet is today, and the second vowel in the word about was pronounced as the word boot is today. The Great Vowel Shift explains many irregularities in spelling, since English retains many spellings from Middle English, and it also explains why English vowel letters have very different pronunciations from the same letters in other languages.[42][43] English began to rise in prestige during the reign of Henry V. Around 1430, the Court of Chancery in Westminster began using English in its official documents, and a new standard form of Middle English, known as Chancery Standard, developed from the dialects of London and the East Midlands. In 1476, William Caxton introduced the printing press to England and began publishing the first printed books in London, expanding the influence of this form of English.[44] Literature from the Early Modern period includes the works of William Shakespeare and the translation of the Bible commissioned by King James I. Even after the vowel shift the language still sounded different from Modern English: for example, the consonant clusters /kn ?n sw/ in knight, gnat, and sword were still pronounced. Many of the grammatical features that a modern reader of Shakespeare might find quaint or archaic represent the distinct characteristics of Early Modern English.[45] In the 1611 King James Version of the Bible, written in Early Modern English, Matthew 8:20 says: The Foxes haue holes and the birds of the ayre haue nests[35] This exemplifies the loss of case and its effects on sentence structure (replacement with Subject-Verb-Object word order, and the use of of instead of the non-possessive genitive), and the introduction of loanwords from French (ayre) and word replacements (bird originally meaning "nestling" had replaced OE fugol). Spread of Modern English By the late 18th century, the British Empire had facilitated the spread of English through its colonies and geopolitical dominance. Commerce, science and technology, diplomacy, art, and formal education all contributed to English becoming the first truly global language. English also facilitated worldwide international communication.[46][47] As England continued to form new colonies, these in turn became independent and developed their own norms for how to speak and write the language. English was adopted in North America, India, parts of Africa, Australasia, and many other regions. In the post-colonial period, some of the newly created nations that had multiple indigenous languages opted to continue using English as the official language to avoid the political difficulties inherent in promoting any one indigenous language above the others.[48][49][50] In the 20th century the growing economic and cultural influence of the United States and its status as a superpower following the Second World War has, along with worldwide broadcasting in English by the BBC[51] and other broadcasters, significantly accelerated the spread of the language across the planet.[52][53] By the 21st century, English was more widely spoken and written than any language has ever been.[54] A major feature in the early development of Modern English was the codification of explicit norms for standard usage, and their dissemination through official media such as public education and state sponsored publications. In 1755 Samuel Johnson published his A Dictionary of the English Language which introduced a standard set of spelling conventions and usage norms. In 1828, Noah Webster published the American Dictionary of the English language in an effort to establish a norm for speaking and writing American English that was independent from the British standard. Within Britain, non-standard or lower class dialect features were increasingly stigmatised, leading to the quick spread of the prestige varieties among the middle classes.[55] In terms of grammatical evolution, Modern English has now reached a stage where the loss of case is almost complete (case is now only found in pronouns, such as he and him, she and her, who and whom), and where SVO word-order is mostly fixed.[55] Some changes, such as the use of do-support have become universalised. (Earlier English did not use the word "do" as a general auxiliary as Modern English does; at first it was only used in question constructions where it was not obligatory.[56] Now, do-support with the verb have is becoming increasingly standardised.) The use of progressive forms in -ing, appears to be spreading to new constructions, and forms such as had been being built are becoming more common. Regularisation of irregular forms also slowly continues (e.g. dreamed instead of dreamt), and analytical alternatives to inflectional forms are becoming more common (e.g. more polite instead of politer). British English is also undergoing change under the influence of American English, fuelled by the strong presence of American English in the media and the prestige associated with the US as a world power. [57][58][59] Geographical distribution See also: List of territorial entities where English is an official language, List of countries by English-speaking population, and English-speaking world Percentage of English speakers by country.   80-100%   60-80%   40-60%   20-40%    0-20%   Not available As of 2016, 400 million people spoke English as their first language, and 1.1 billion spoke it as a secondary language.[60] English is probably the third largest language by number of native speakers, after Mandarin and Spanish.[8] However, when combining native and non-native speakers it may, depending on the estimate used, be the most commonly spoken language in the world.[54][61][62][63] English is spoken by communities on every continent and on oceanic islands in all the major oceans.[64] The countries in which English is spoken can be grouped into different categories by how English is used in each country. The "inner circle"[65] countries with many native speakers of English share an international standard of written English and jointly influence speech norms of English around the world. English does not belong to just one country, and it does not belong solely to descendants of English settlers. English is an official language of countries populated by few descendants of native speakers of English. It has also become by far the most important language of international communication when people who share no native language meet anywhere in the world. Three circles of English-speaking countries Braj Kachru distinguishes countries where English is spoken with a three circles model.[65] In his model, the "inner circle" countries are countries with large communities of native speakers of English, "outer circle" countries have small communities of native speakers of English but widespread use of English as a second language in education or broadcasting or for local official purposes, and "expanding circle" countries are countries where many learners learn English as a foreign language. Kachru bases his model on the history of how English spread in different countries, how users acquire English, and the range of uses English has in each country. The three circles change membership over time.[66] Braj Kachru's Three Circles of English. Countries with large communities of native speakers of English (the inner circle) include Britain, the United States, Australia, Canada, Ireland, and New Zealand, where the majority speaks English, and South Africa, where a significant minority speaks English. The countries with the most native English speakers are, in descending order, the United States (at least 231 million),[67] the United Kingdom (60 million),[68][69][70] Canada (19 million),[71] Australia (at least 17 million),[72] South Africa (4.8 million),[73] Ireland (4.2 million), and New Zealand (3.7 million).[74] In these countries, children of native speakers learn English from their parents, and local people who speak other languages or new immigrants learn English to communicate in their neighbourhoods and workplaces.[75] The inner-circle countries provide the base from which English spreads to other countries in the world.[66] Estimates of the number of English speakers who are second language and foreign-language speakers vary greatly from 470 million to more than 1,000 million depending on how proficiency is defined.[7] Linguist David Crystal estimates that non-native speakers now outnumber native speakers by a ratio of 3 to 1.[61] In Kachru's three-circles model, the "outer circle" countries are countries such as the Philippines,[76] Jamaica,[77] India, Pakistan[citation needed], Singapore,[78] and Nigeria[79][80] with a much smaller proportion of native speakers of English but much use of English as a second language for education, government, or domestic business, and where English is routinely used for school instruction and official interactions with the government.[81] Those countries have millions of native speakers of dialect continua ranging from an English-based creole to a more standard version of English. They have many more speakers of English who acquire English in the process of growing up through day by day use and listening to broadcasting, especially if they attend schools where English is the medium of instruction. Varieties of English learned by speakers who are not native speakers born to English-speaking parents may be influenced, especially in their grammar, by the other languages spoken by those learners.[75] Most of those varieties of English include words little used by native speakers of English in the inner-circle countries,[75] and they may have grammatical and phonological differences from inner-circle varieties as well. The standard English of the inner-circle countries is often taken as a norm for use of English in the outer-circle countries.[75] In the three-circles model, countries such as Poland, China, Brazil, Germany, Japan, Indonesia, Egypt, and other countries where English is taught as a foreign language make up the "expanding circle".[82] The distinctions between English as a first language, as a second language, and as a foreign language are often debatable and may change in particular countries over time.[81] For example, in the Netherlands and some other countries of Europe, knowledge of English as a second language is nearly universal, with over 80 percent of the population able to use it,[83] and thus English is routinely used to communicate with foreigners and often in higher education. In these countries, although English is not used for government business, the widespread use of English in these countries puts them at the boundary between the "outer circle" and "expanding circle". English is unusual among world languages in how many of its users are not native speakers but speakers of English as a second or foreign language.[84] Many users of English in the expanding circle use it to communicate with other people from the expanding circle, so that interaction with native speakers of English plays no part in their decision to use English.[85] Non-native varieties of English are widely used for international communication, and speakers of one such variety often encounter features of other varieties.[86] Very often today a conversation in English anywhere in the world may include no native speakers of English at all, even while including speakers from several different countries.[87] Pie chart showing the percentage of native English speakers living in "inner circle" English-speaking countries. Native speakers are now substantially outnumbered worldwide by second-language speakers of English (not counted in this chart).   US (64.3%)   UK (16.7%)   Canada (5.3%)   Australia (4.7%)   South Africa (1.3%)   Ireland (1.1%)   New Zealand (1%)   Other (5.6%) Pluricentric English English is a pluricentric language, which means that no one national authority sets the standard for use of the language.[88][89][90][91] But English is not a divided language,[92] despite a long-standing joke originally attributed to George Bernard Shaw that the United Kingdom and the United States are "two countries separated by a common language".[93] Spoken English, for example English used in broadcasting, generally follows national pronunciation standards that are also established by custom rather than by regulation. International broadcasters are usually identifiable as coming from one country rather than another through their accents,[94] but newsreader scripts are also composed largely in international standard written English. The norms of standard written English are maintained purely by the consensus of educated English-speakers around the world, without any oversight by any government or international organisation.[95] American listeners generally readily understand most British broadcasting, and British listeners readily understand most American broadcasting. Most English speakers around the world can understand radio programmes, television programmes, and films from many parts of the English-speaking world.[96] Both standard and nonstandard varieties of English can include both formal or informal styles, distinguished by word choice and syntax and use both technical and non-technical registers.[97] The settlement history of the English-speaking inner circle countries outside Britain helped level dialect distinctions and produce koineised forms of English in South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand.[98] The majority of immigrants to the United States without British ancestry rapidly adopted English after arrival. Now the majority of the United States population are monolingual English speakers,[99][67] although English has been given official status by only 30 of the 50 state governments of the US.[100][101] English as a global language English has ceased to be an "English language" in the sense of belonging only to people who are ethnically English.[102][103] Use of English is growing country-by-country internally and for international communication. Most people learn English for practical rather than ideological reasons.[104] Many speakers of English in Africa have become part of an "Afro-Saxon" language community that unites Africans from different countries.[105] As decolonisation proceeded throughout the British Empire in the 1950s and 1960s, former colonies often did not reject English but rather continued to use it as independent countries setting their own language policies.[49][50][106] For example, the view of the English language among many Indians has gone from associating it with colonialism to associating it with economic progress, and English continues to be an official language of India.[107] English is also widely used in media and literature, and the number of English language books published annually in India is the third largest in the world after the US and UK.[108] However English is rarely spoken as a first language, numbering only around a couple hundred-thousand people, and less than 5% of the population speak fluent English in India.[109][110] David Crystal claimed in 2004 that, combining native and non-native speakers, India now has more people who speak or understand English than any other country in the world,[111] but the number of English speakers in India is very uncertain, with most scholars concluding that the United States still has more speakers of English than India.[112] Modern English, sometimes described as the first global lingua franca,[52][113] is also regarded as the first world language.[114][115] English is the world's most widely used language in newspaper publishing, book publishing, international telecommunications, scientific publishing, international trade, mass entertainment, and diplomacy.[115] English is, by international treaty, the basis for the required controlled natural languages[116] Seaspeak and Airspeak, used as international languages of seafaring[117] and aviation.[118] English used to have parity with French & German in scientific research, but now it dominates that field.[119] It achieved parity with French as a language of diplomacy at the Treaty of Versailles negotiations in 1919.[120] By the time of the foundation of the United Nations at the end of World War II, English had become pre-eminent [121] and is now the main worldwide language of diplomacy and international relations.[122] It is one of six official languages of the United Nations.[123] Many other worldwide international organisations, including the International Olympic Committee, specify English as a working language or official language of the organisation. Many regional international organisations such as the European Free Trade Association, Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),[53] and Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) set English as their organisation's sole working language even though most members are not countries with a majority of native English speakers. While the European Union (EU) allows member states to designate any of the national languages as an official language of the Union, in practice English is the main working language of EU organisations.[124] Although in most countries English is not an official language, it is currently the language most often taught as a foreign language.[52][53] In the countries of the EU, English is the most widely spoken foreign language in nineteen of the twenty-five member states where it is not an official language (that is, the countries other than the UK, Ireland and Malta). In a 2012 official Eurobarometer poll, 38 percent of the EU respondents outside the countries where English is an official language said they could speak English well enough to have a conversation in that language. The next most commonly mentioned foreign language, French (which is the most widely known foreign language in the UK and Ireland), could be used in conversation by 12 percent of respondents.[125] A working knowledge of English has become a requirement in a number of occupations and professions such as medicine[126] and computing. English has become so important in scientific publishing that more than 80 percent of all scientific journal articles indexed by Chemical Abstracts in 1998 were written in English, as were 90 percent of all articles in natural science publications by 1996 and 82 percent of articles in humanities publications by 1995.[127] Specialised subsets of English arise spontaneously in international communities, for example, among international business people, as an auxiliary language. This has led some scholars to develop the study of English as an auxiliary languages. Globish uses a relatively small subset of English vocabulary (about 1500 words with highest use in international business English) in combination with the standard English grammar. Other examples include Simple English. The increased use of the English language globally has had an effect on other languages, leading to some English words being assimilated into the vocabularies of other languages. This influence of English has led to concerns about language death,[128] and to claims of linguistic imperialism,[129] and has provoked resistance to the spread of English; however the number of speakers continues to increase because many people around the world think that English provides them with opportunities for better employment and improved lives.[130] Although some scholars mention a possibility of future divergence of English dialects into mutually unintelligible languages, most think a more likely outcome is that English will continue to function as a koineised language in which the standard form unifies speakers from around the world.[131] English is used as the language for wider communication in countries around the world.[132] Thus English has grown in worldwide use much more than any constructed language proposed as an international auxiliary language, including Esperanto.[133][134] Phonology Main article: English phonology The phonetics and phonology of English differ between dialects, usually without interfering with mutual communication. Phonological variation affects the inventory of phonemes (speech sounds that distinguish meaning), and phonetic variation is differences in pronunciation of the phonemes.[135] This overview mainly describes the standard pronunciations of the United Kingdom and the United States: Received Pronunciation (RP) and General American (GA) (See Section below on "Dialects, accents and varieties"). The phonetic symbols used below are from the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA).[136][137][138] Consonants Main article: English phonology § Consonants Most English dialects share the same 24 consonant phonemes. The consonant inventory shown below is valid for Californian American English,[139] and for RP.[140] Consonant phonemes Labial Dental Alveolar Post- alveolar Palatal Velar Glottal Nasal m n ? Stop p b t d k ? Affricate t? d? Fricative f v ? ð s z ? ? h Approximant ?* j w Lateral l * Conventionally transcribed /r/. In the table, when obstruents (stops, affricates, and fricatives) appear in pairs, such as /p b/, /t? d?/, and /s z/, the first is fortis (strong) and the second is lenis (weak). Fortis obstruents, such as /p t? s/ are pronounced with more muscular tension and breath force than lenis consonants, such as /b d? z/, and are always voiceless. Lenis consonants are partly voiced at the beginning and end of utterances, and fully voiced between vowels. Fortis stops such as /p/ have additional articulatory or acoustic features in most dialects: they are aspirated [p?] when they occur alone at the beginning of a stressed syllable, often unaspirated in other cases, and often unreleased [p? ] or pre-glottalised [?p] at the end of a syllable. In a single-syllable word, a vowel before a fortis stop is shortened: thus nip has a noticeably shorter vowel (phonetically, but not phonemically) than nib [n??p?] (see below).[141] lenis stops: bin [b???n], about [??ba?t], nib [n??b?] fortis stops: pin [?p??n], spin [sp?n], happy [?hæpi], nip [?nip? ] or [?ni?p] In RP, the lateral approximant /l/, has two main allophones (pronunciation variants): the clear or plain [l], as in light, and the dark or velarised [?], as in full.[142] GA has dark l in most cases.[143] clear l: RP light [la?t] dark l: RP and GA full [f??], GA light [?a?t] All sonorants (liquids /l, r/ and nasals /m, n, ?/) devoice when following a voiceless obstruent, and they are syllabic when following a consonant at the end of a word.[144] voiceless sonorants: clay [?kl????] and snow [?sn?o?] syllabic sonorants: paddle [pad.l?], and button [b?t.n?] Vowels Main article: English phonology § Vowels The pronunciation of vowels varies a great deal between dialects and is one of the most detectable aspects of a speaker's accent. The table below lists the vowel phonemes in Received Pronunciation (RP) and General American (GA), with examples of words in which they occur from lexical sets compiled by linguists. The vowels are represented with symbols from the International Phonetic Alphabet; those given for RP are standard in British dictionaries and other publications. monophthongs RP GA word i? i need ? bid e ? bed æ back monophthongs RP GA word (?) ? roses ? comma ?? ?r bird ? but monophthongs RP GA word u? u food ? good ?? ? paw ? cloth ? box ?? bra diphthongs RP GA word e? bay ?? o? road a? cry a? cow ?? boy In RP, vowel length is phonemic; long vowels are marked with a triangular colon ??? in the table above, such as the vowel of need [ni?d] as opposed to bid [b?d]. GA does not have long vowels. In both RP and GA, vowels are phonetically shortened before fortis consonants in the same syllable, like /t t? f/, but not before lenis consonants like /d d? v/ or in open syllables: thus, the vowels of rich [r??t?], neat [ni?t], and safe [s???f] are noticeably shorter than the vowels of ridge [r?d?], need [ni?d], and save [se?v], and the vowel of light [l???t] is shorter than that of lie [la?]. Because lenis consonants are frequently voiceless at the end of a syllable, vowel length is an important cue as to whether the following consonant is lenis or fortis.[145] The vowels /? ?/ only occur in unstressed syllables and are a result of vowel reduction. Some dialects do not distinguish them, so that roses and comma end in the same vowel, a dialect feature called weak-vowel merger. GA has an unstressed r-coloured schwa /?/, as in butter [?b?t?], which in RP has the same vowel as the word-final vowel in comma. Phonotactics An English syllable includes a syllable nucleus consisting of a vowel sound. Syllable onset and coda (start and end) are optional. A syllable can start with up to three consonant sounds, as in sprint /spr?nt/, and end with up to four, as in texts /teksts/. This gives an English syllable the following structure, (CCC)V(CCCC) where C represents a consonant and V a vowel. The consonants that may appear together in onsets or codas are restricted, as is the order in which they may appear. Onsets can only have four types of consonant clusters: a stop and approximant, as in play; a voiceless fricative and approximant, as in fly or sly; s and a voiceless stop, as in stay; and s, a voiceless stop, and an approximant, as in string.[146] Clusters of nasal and stop are only allowed in codas. Clusters of obstruents always agree in voicing, and clusters of sibilants and of plosives with the same point of articulation are prohibited. Furthermore, several consonants have limited distributions: /h/ can only occur in syllable initial position, and /?/ only in syllable final position.[147] Stress, rhythm and intonation See also: Stress and vowel reduction in English and Intonation in English Stress plays an important role in English. Certain syllables are stressed, while others are unstressed. Stress is a combination of duration, intensity, vowel quality, and sometimes changes in pitch. Stressed syllables are pronounced longer and louder than unstressed syllables, and vowels in unstressed syllables are frequently reduced while vowels in stressed syllables are not.[148] Some words, primarily short function words but also some modal verbs such as can, have weak and strong forms depending on whether they occur in stressed or non-stressed position within a sentence. Stress in English is phonemic, and some pairs of words are distinguished by stress. For instance, the word contract is stressed on the first syllable (/?k?ntrækt/ KON-trakt) when used as a noun, but on the last syllable (/k?n?trækt/ k?n-TRAKT) for most meanings (for example, "reduce in size") when used as a verb.[149][150][151] Here stress is connected to vowel reduction: in the noun "contract" the first syllable is stressed and has the unreduced vowel /?/, but in the verb "contract" the first syllable is unstressed and its vowel is reduced to /?/. Stress is also used to distinguish between words and phrases, so that a compound word receives a single stress unit, but the corresponding phrase has two: e.g. to búrn óut versus a búrnout, and a hótdog versus a hót dóg.[152] In terms of rhythm, English is generally described as a stress-timed language, meaning that the amount of time between stressed syllables tends to be equal. Stressed syllables are pronounced longer, but unstressed syllables (syllables between stresses) are shortened. Vowels in unstressed syllables are shortened as well, and vowel shortening causes changes in vowel quality: vowel reduction. Regional variation Varieties of Standard English and their features[153] Phonological features United States Canada Republic of Ireland Northern Ireland Scotland England Wales South Africa Australia New Zealand father–bother merger yes yes /?/ is unrounded yes yes yes /??r/ is pronounced [?] yes yes yes yes cot–caught merger possibly yes possibly yes yes fool–full merger yes yes /t?d/ flapping (latter-ladder merger) yes yes possibly often rarely rarely rarely rarely yes often trap–bath split possibly possibly yes yes yes often yes non-rhotic (/r/-dropping after vowels) yes yes yes yes yes close vowels for /æ, ?/ yes yes yes /l/ can always be pronounced [?] yes yes yes yes yes yes /??r/ is fronted possibly yes yes Dialects and low vowels word RP GA Can sound change THOUGHT /?/ /?/ or /?/ /?/ cot–caught merger CLOTH /?/ lot–cloth split LOT /?/ father–bother merger PALM /??/ PLANT /æ/ /æ/ trap–bath split BATH TRAP /æ/ Varieties of English vary the most in pronunciation of vowels. The best known national varieties used as standards for education in non English-speaking countries are British (BrE) and American (AmE). Countries such as Canada, Australia, Ireland, New Zealand and South Africa have their own standard varieties which are less often used as standards for education internationally. Some differences between the various dialects are shown in the table "Varieties of Standard English and their features".[153] English has undergone many historical sound changes, some of them affecting all varieties, and others affecting only a few. Most standard varieties are affected by the Great Vowel Shift, which changed the pronunciation of long vowels, but a few dialects have slightly different results. In North America, a number of chain shifts such as the Northern Cities Vowel Shift and Canadian Shift have produced very different vowel landscapes in some regional accents. Some dialects have fewer or more consonant phonemes and phones than the standard varieties. Some conservative varieties like Scottish English have a voiceless [?] sound in whine that contrasts with the voiced [w] in wine, but most other dialects pronounce both words with voiced [w], a dialect feature called wine–whine merger. The unvoiced velar fricative sound /x/ is found in Scottish English, which distinguishes loch /l?x/ from lock /l?k/. Accents like Cockney with "h-dropping" lack the glottal fricative /h/, and dialects with th-stopping and th-fronting like African American Vernacular and Estuary English do not have the dental fricatives /?, ð/, but replace them with dental or alveolar stops /t, d/ or labiodental fricatives /f, v/.[154][155] Other changes affecting the phonology of local varieties are processes such as yod-dropping, yod-coalescence, and reduction of consonant clusters. General American and Received Pronunciation vary in their pronunciation of historical /r/ after a vowel at the end of a syllable (in the syllable coda). GA is a rhotic dialect, meaning that it pronounces /r/ at the end of a syllable, but RP is non-rhotic, meaning that it loses /r/ in that position. English dialects are classified as rhotic or non-rhotic depending on whether they elide /r/ like RP or keep it like GA.[156] There is complex dialectal variation in words with the open front and open back vowels /æ ?? ? ??/. These four vowels are only distinguished in RP, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. In GA, these vowels merge to three /æ ? ?/,[157] and in Canadian English they merge to two /æ ?/.[158] In addition, the words that have each vowel vary by dialect. The table "Dialects and open vowels" shows this variation with lexical sets in which these sounds occur. Grammar Main article: English grammar As is typical of an Indo-European language, English follows accusative morphosyntactic alignment. English distinguishes at least seven major word classes: verbs, nouns, adjectives, adverbs, determiners (i.e. articles), prepositions, and conjunctions. Some analyses add pronouns as a class separate from nouns, and subdivide conjunctions into subordinators and coordinators, and add the class of interjections.[159] English also has a rich set of auxiliary verbs, such as have and do, expressing the categories of mood and aspect. Questions are marked by do-support, wh-movement (fronting of question words beginning with wh-) and word order inversion with some verbs. Some traits typical of Germanic languages persist in English, such as the distinction between irregularly inflected strong stems inflected through ablaut (i.e. changing the vowel of the stem, as in the pairs speak/spoke and foot/feet) and weak stems inflected through affixation (such as love/loved, hand/hands). Vestiges of the case and gender system are found in the pronoun system (he/him, who/whom) and in the inflection of the copula verb to be. The seven word classes are exemplified in this sample sentence:[160] The chairman of the committee and the loquacious politician clashed violently when the meeting started Det. Noun Prep. Det. Noun Conj. Det. Adj. Noun Verb Advb. Conj. Det. Noun Verb Nouns and noun phrases English nouns are only inflected for number and possession. New nouns can be formed through derivation or compounding. They are semantically divided into proper nouns (names) and common nouns. Common nouns are in turn divided into concrete and abstract nouns, and grammatically into count nouns and mass nouns.[161] Most count nouns are inflected for plural number through the use of the plural suffix -s, but a few nouns have irregular plural forms. Mass nouns can only be pluralised through the use of a count noun classifier, e.g. one loaf of bread, two loaves of bread.[162] Regular plural formation: Singular: cat, dog Plural: cats, dogs Irregular plural formation: Singular: man, woman, foot, fish, ox, knife, mouse Plural: men, women, feet, fish, oxen, knives, mice Possession can be expressed either by the possessive enclitic -s (also traditionally called a genitive suffix), or by the preposition of. Historically the -s possessive has been used for animate nouns, whereas the of possessive has been reserved for inanimate nouns. Today this distinction is less clear, and many speakers use -s also with inanimates. Orthographically the possessive -s is separated from the noun root with an apostrophe. Possessive constructions: With -s: The woman's husband's child With of: The child of the husband of the woman Nouns can form noun phrases (NPs) where they are the syntactic head of the words that depend on them such as determiners, quantifiers, conjunctions or adjectives.[163] Noun phrases can be short, such as the man, composed only of a determiner and a noun. They can also include modifiers such as adjectives (e.g. red, tall, all) and specifiers such as determiners (e.g. the, that). But they can also tie together several nouns into a single long NP, using conjunctions such as and, or prepositions such as with, e.g. the tall man with the long red trousers and his skinny wife with the spectacles (this NP uses conjunctions, prepositions, specifiers and modifiers). Regardless of length, an NP functions as a syntactic unit. For example, the possessive enclitic can, in cases which do not lead to ambiguity, follow the entire noun phrase, as in The President of India's wife, where the enclitic follows India and not President. The class of determiners is used to specify the noun they precede in terms of definiteness, where the marks a definite noun and a or an an indefinite one. A definite noun is assumed by the speaker to be already known by the interlocutor, whereas an indefinite noun is not specified as being previously known. Quantifiers, which include one, many, some and all, are used to specify the noun in terms of quantity or number. The noun must agree with the number of the determiner, e.g. one man (sg.) but all men (pl.). Determiners are the first constituents in a noun phrase.[164] Adjectives Adjectives modify a noun by providing additional information about their referents. In English, adjectives come before the nouns they modify and after determiners.[165] In Modern English, adjectives are not inflected, and they do not agree in form with the noun they modify, as adjectives in most other Indo-European languages do. For example, in the phrases the slender boy, and many slender girls, the adjective slender does not change form to agree with either the number or gender of the noun. Some adjectives are inflected for degree of comparison, with the positive degree unmarked, the suffix -er marking the comparative, and -est marking the superlative: a small boy, the boy is smaller than the girl, that boy is the smallest. Some adjectives have irregular comparative and superlative forms, such as good, better, and best. Other adjectives have comparatives formed by periphrastic constructions, with the adverb more marking the comparative, and most marking the superlative: happier or more happy, the happiest or most happy.[166] There is some variation among speakers regarding which adjectives use inflected or periphrastic comparison, and some studies have shown a tendency for the periphrastic forms to become more common at the expense of the inflected form.[167] Pronouns, case and person English pronouns conserve many traits of case and gender inflection. The personal pronouns retain a difference between subjective and objective case in most persons (I/me, he/him, she/her, we/us, they/them) as well as a gender and animateness distinction in the third person singular (distinguishing he/she/it). The subjective case corresponds to the Old English nominative case, and the objective case is used both in the sense of the previous accusative case (in the role of patient, or direct object of a transitive verb), and in the sense of the Old English dative case (in the role of a recipient or indirect object of a transitive verb).[168][169] Subjective case is used when the pronoun is the subject of a finite clause, and otherwise the objective case is used.[170] While grammarians such as Henry Sweet[171] and Otto Jespersen[172] noted that the English cases did not correspond to the traditional Latin based system, some contemporary grammars, for example Huddleston & Pullum (2002), retain traditional labels for the cases, calling them nominative and accusative cases respectively. Possessive pronouns exist in dependent and independent forms; the dependent form functions as a determiner specifying a noun (as in my chair), while the independent form can stand alone as if it were a noun (e.g. the chair is mine).[173] The English system of grammatical person no longer has a distinction between formal and informal pronouns of address, and the forms for 2nd person plural and singular are identical except in the reflexive form. Some dialects have introduced innovative 2nd person plural pronouns such as y'all found in Southern American English and African American (Vernacular) English or youse and ye found in Irish English. English personal pronouns Person Subjective case Objective case Dependent possessive Independent possessive Reflexive 1st p. sg. I me my mine myself 2nd o. sg. you you your yours yourself 3rd p. sg. he/she/it him/her/it his/her/its his/hers/its himself/herself/itself 1st p. pl. we us our ours ourselves 2nd p. pl. you you your yours yourselves 3rd p. pl they them their theirs themselves Pronouns are used to refer to entities deictically or anaphorically. A deictic pronoun points to some person or object by identifying it relative to the speech situation — for example the pronoun I identifies the speaker, and the pronoun you, the addressee. Anaphorical pronouns such as that refer back to an entity already mentioned or assumed by the speaker to be known by the audience, for example in the sentence I already told you that. The reflexive pronouns are used when the oblique argument is identical to the subject of a phrase (e.g. "he sent it to himself" or "she braced herself for impact").[174] Prepositions Prepositional phrases (PP) are phrases composed of a preposition and one or more nouns, e.g. with the dog, for my friend, to school, in England. Prepositions have a wide range of uses in English. They are used to describe movement, place, and other relations between different entities, but they also have many syntactic uses such as introducing complement clauses and oblique arguments of verbs. For example, in the phrase I gave it to him, the preposition to marks the recipient, or Indirect Object of the verb to give. Traditionally words were only considered prepositions if they governed the case of the noun they preceded, for example causing the pronouns to use the objective rather than subjective form, "with her", "to me", "for us". But some contemporary grammars such as that of Huddleston & Pullum (2002:598–600) no longer consider government of case to be the defining feature of the class of prepositions, rather defining prepositions as words that can function as the heads of prepositional phrases. Verbs and verb phrases English verbs are inflected for tense and aspect, and marked for agreement with third person singular subject. Only the copula verb to be is still inflected for agreement with the plural and first and second person subjects.[166] Auxiliary verbs such as have and be are paired with verbs in the infinitive, past, or progressive forms. They form complex tenses, aspects, and moods. Auxiliary verbs differ from other verbs in that they can be followed by the negation, and in that they can occur as the first constituent in a question sentence.[175][176] Most verbs have six inflectional forms. The primary forms are a plain present, a third person singular present, and a preterite (past) form. The secondary forms are a plain form used for the infinitive, a gerund–participle and a past participle.[177] The copula verb to be is the only verb to retain some of its original conjugation, and takes different inflectional forms depending on the subject. The first person present tense form is am, the third person singular form is and the form are is used second person singular and all three plurals. The only verb past participle is been and its gerund-participle is being. English inflectional forms Inflection Strong Regular Plain present take love 3rd person sg. present takes loves Preterite took loved Plain (infinitive) take love Gerund–participle taking loving Past participle taken loved Tense, aspect and mood English has two primary tenses, past (preterit) and non-past. The preterit is inflected by using the preterit form of the verb, which for the regular verbs includes the suffix -ed, and for the strong verbs either the suffix -t or a change in the stem vowel. The non-past form is unmarked except in the third person singular, which takes the suffix -s.[175] Present Preterite First person I run I ran Second person You run You ran Third person John runs John ran English does not have a morphologised future tense.[178] Futurity of action is expressed periphrastically with one of the auxiliary verbs will or shall.[179] Many varieties also use a near future constructed with the phrasal verb be going to.[180] Future First person I will run Second person You will run Third person John will run Further aspectual distinctions are encoded by the use of auxiliary verbs, primarily have and be, which encode the contrast between a perfect and non-perfect past tense (I have run vs. I was running), and compound tenses such as preterite perfect (I had been running) and present perfect (I have been running).[181] For the expression of mood, English uses a number of modal auxiliaries, such as can, may, will, shall and the past tense forms could, might, would, should. There is also a subjunctive and an imperative mood, both based on the plain form of the verb (i.e. without the third person singular -s), and which is used in subordinate clauses (e.g. subjunctive: It is important that he run every day; imperative Run!).[179] An infinitive form, that uses the plain form of the verb and the preposition to, is used for verbal clauses that are syntactically subordinate to a finite verbal clause. Finite verbal clauses are those that are formed around a verb in the present or preterit form. In clauses with auxiliary verbs they are the finite verbs and the main verb is treated as a subordinate clause. For example, he has to go where only the auxiliary verb have is inflected for time and the main verb to go is in the infinitive, or in a complement clause such as I saw him leave, where the main verb is to see which is in a preterite form, and leave is in the infinitive. Phrasal verbs English also makes frequent use of constructions traditionally called phrasal verbs, verb phrases that are made up of a verb root and a preposition or particle which follows the verb. The phrase then functions as a single predicate. In terms of intonation the preposition is fused to the verb, but in writing it is written as a separate word. Examples of phrasal verbs are to get up, to ask out, to back up, to give up, to get together, to hang out, to put up with, etc. The phrasal verb frequently has a highly idiomatic meaning that is more specialised and restricted than what can be simply extrapolated from the combination of verb and preposition complement (e.g. lay off meaning terminate someone's employment).[182] In spite of the idiomatic meaning, some grammarians, including Huddleston & Pullum (2002):274, do not consider this type of construction to form a syntactic constituent and hence refrain from using the term "phrasal verb". Instead they consider the construction simply to be a verb with a prepositional phrase as its syntactic complement, i.e. he woke up in the morning and he ran up in the mountains are syntactically equivalent. Adverbs The function of adverbs is to modify the action or event described by the verb by providing additional information about the manner in which it occurs. Many adverbs are derived from adjectives with the suffix -ly, but not all, and many speakers tend to omit the suffix in the most commonly used adverbs. For example, in the phrase the woman walked quickly the adverb quickly derived from the adjective quick describes the woman's way of walking. Some commonly used adjectives have irregular adverbial forms, such as good which has the adverbial form well. Syntax In the English sentence The cat sat on the mat, the subject is the cat (a NP), the verb is sat, and on the mat is a prepositional phrase (composed of an NP the mat, and headed by the preposition on). The tree describes the structure of the sentence. Modern English syntax language is moderately analytic.[183] It has developed features such as modal verbs and word order as resources for conveying meaning. Auxiliary verbs mark constructions such as questions, negative polarity, the passive voice and progressive aspect. Basic constituent order English word order has moved from the Germanic verb-second (V2) word order to being almost exclusively subject–verb–object (SVO).[184] The combination of SVO order and use of auxiliary verbs often creates clusters of two or more verbs at the centre of the sentence, such as he had hoped to try to open it. In most sentences English only marks grammatical relations through word order.[185] The subject constituent precedes the verb and the object constituent follows it. The example below demonstrates how the grammatical roles of each constituent is marked only by the position relative to the verb: The dog bites the man S V O The man bites the dog S V O An exception is found in sentences where one of the constituents is a pronoun, in which case it is doubly marked, both by word order and by case inflection, where the subject pronoun precedes the verb and takes the subjective case form, and the object pronoun follows the verb and takes the objective case form. The example below demonstrates this double marking in a sentence where both object and subject is represented with a third person singular masculine pronoun: He hit him S V O Indirect objects (IO) of ditransitive verbs can be placed either as the first object in a double object construction (S V IO O), such as I gave Jane the book or in a prepositional phrase, such as I gave the book to Jane [186] Clause syntax Main article: English clause syntax In English a sentence may be composed of one or more clauses, that may in turn be composed of one or more phrases (e.g. Noun Phrases, Verb Phrases, and Prepositional Phrases). A clause is built around a verb, and includes its constituents, such as any NPs and PPs. Within a sentence one clause is always the main clause (or matrix clause) whereas other clauses are subordinate to it. Subordinate clauses may function as arguments of the verb in the main clause. For example, in the phrase I think (that) you are lying, the main clause is headed by the verb think, the subject is I, but the object of the phrase is the subordinate clause (that) you are lying. The subordinating conjunction that shows that the clause that follows is a subordinate clause, but it is often omitted.[187] Relative clauses are clauses that function as a modifier or specifier to some constituent in the main clause: For example, in the sentence I saw the letter that you received today, the relative clause that you received today specifies the meaning of the word letter, the object of the main clause. Relative clauses can be introduced by the pronouns who, whose, whom and which as well as by that (which can also be omitted.)[188] In contrast to many other Germanic languages there is no major differences between word order in main and subordinate clauses.[189] Auxiliary verb constructions Main articles: Do-support and Subject–auxiliary inversion English syntax relies on auxiliary verbs for many functions including the expression of tense, aspect and mood. Auxiliary verbs form main clauses, and the main verbs function as heads of a subordinate clause of the auxiliary verb. For example, in the sentence the dog did not find its bone, the clause find its bone is the complement of the negated verb did not. Subject–auxiliary inversion is used in many constructions, including focus, negation, and interrogative constructions. The verb do can be used as an auxiliary even in simple declarative sentences, where it usually serves to add emphasis, as in "I did shut the fridge." However, in the negated and inverted clauses referred to above, it is used because the rules of English syntax permit these constructions only when an auxiliary is present. Modern English does not allow the addition of the negating adverb not to an ordinary finite lexical verb, as in *I know not—it can only be added to an auxiliary (or copular) verb, hence if there is no other auxiliary present when negation is required, the auxiliary do is used, to produce a form like I do not (don't) know. The same applies in clauses requiring inversion, including most questions—inversion must involve the subject and an auxiliary verb, so it is not possible to say *Know you him?; grammatical rules require Do you know him?[190] Negation is done with the adverb not, which precedes the main verb and follows an auxiliary verb. A contracted form of not -n't can be used as an enclitic attaching to auxiliary verbs and to the copula verb to be. Just as with questions, many negative constructions require the negation to occur with do-support, thus in Modern English I don't know him is the correct answer to the question Do you know him?, but not *I know him not, although this construction may be found in older English.[191] Passive constructions also use auxiliary verbs. A passive construction rephrases an active construction in such a way that the object of the active phrase becomes the subject of the passive phrase, and the subject of the active phrase is either omitted or demoted to a role as an oblique argument introduced in a prepositional phrase. They are formed by using the past participle either with the auxiliary verb to be or to get, although not all varieties of English allow the use of passives with get. For example, putting the sentence she sees him into the passive becomes he is seen (by her), or he gets seen (by her).[192] Questions Both yes–no questions and wh-questions in English are mostly formed using subject–auxiliary inversion (Am I going tomorrow?, Where can we eat?), which may require do-support (Do you like her?, Where did he go?). In most cases, interrogative words (wh-words; e.g. what, who, where, when, why, how) appear in a fronted position. For example, in the question What did you see?, the word what appears as the first constituent despite being the grammatical object of the sentence. (When the wh-word is the subject or forms part of the subject, no inversion occurs: Who saw the cat?.) Prepositional phrases can also be fronted when they are the question's theme, e.g. To whose house did you go last night?. The personal interrogative pronoun who is the only interrogative pronoun to still show inflection for case, with the variant whom serving as the objective case form, although this form may be going out of use in many contexts.[193] Discourse level syntax At the discourse level English tends to use a topic-comment structure, where the known information (topic) precedes the new information (comment). Because of the strict SVO syntax, the topic of a sentence generally has to be the grammatical subject of the sentence. In cases where the topic is not the grammatical subject of the sentence, frequently the topic is promoted to subject position through syntactic means. One way of doing this is through a passive construction, the girl was stung by the bee. Another way is through a cleft sentence where the main clause is demoted to be a complement clause of a copula sentence with a dummy subject such as it or there, e.g. it was the girl that the bee stung, there was a girl who was stung by a bee.[194] Dummy subjects are also used in constructions where there is no grammatical subject such as with impersonal verbs (e.g., it is raining) or in existential clauses (there are many cars on the street). Through the use of these complex sentence constructions with informationally vacuous subjects, English is able to maintain both a topic comment sentence structure and a SVO syntax. Focus constructions emphasise a particular piece of new or salient information within a sentence, generally through allocating the main sentence level stress on the focal constituent. For example, the girl was stung by a bee (emphasising it was a bee and not for example a wasp that stung her), or The girl was stung by a bee (contrasting with another possibility, for example that it was the boy).[195] Topic and focus can also be established through syntactic dislocation, either preposing or postposing the item to be focused on relative to the main clause. For example, That girl over there, she was stung by a bee, emphasises the girl by preposition, but a similar effect could be achieved by postposition, she was stung by a bee, that girl over there, where reference to the girl is established as an "afterthought".[196] Cohesion between sentences is achieved through the use of deictic pronouns as anaphora (e.g. that is exactly what I mean where that refers to some fact known to both interlocutors, or then used to locate the time of a narrated event relative to the time of a previously narrated event).[197] Discourse markers such as oh, so or well, also signal the progression of ideas between sentences and help to create cohesion. Discourse markers are often the first constituents in sentences. Discourse markers are also used for stance taking in which speakers position themselves in a specific attitude towards what is being said, for example, no way is that true! (the idiomatic marker no way! expressing disbelief), or boy! I'm hungry (the marker boy expressing emphasis). While discourse markers are particularly characteristic of informal and spoken registers of English, they are also used in written and formal registers.[198] Vocabulary The vocabulary of English is vast, and counting exactly how many words English (or any language) has is impossible.[199][200][201] The Oxford Dictionaries suggest that there are at least a quarter of a million distinct English words.[199] Early studies of English vocabulary by lexicographers, the scholars who formally study vocabulary, compile dictionaries, or both, were impeded by a lack of comprehensive data on actual vocabulary in use from good-quality linguistic corpora,[202] collections of actual written texts and spoken passages. Many statements published before the end of the 20th century about the growth of English vocabulary over time, the dates of first use of various words in English, and the sources of English vocabulary will have to be corrected as new computerised analysis of linguistic corpus data becomes available.[201][203] Word formation processes English forms new words from existing words or roots in its vocabulary through a variety of processes. One of the most productive processes in English is conversion,[204] using a word with a different grammatical role, for example using a noun as a verb or a verb as a noun. Another productive word-formation process is nominal compounding,[201][203] producing compound words such as babysitter or ice cream or homesick.[204] A process more common in Old English than in Modern English, but still productive in Modern English, is the use of derivational suffixes (-hood, -ness, -ing, -ility) to derive new words from existing words (especially those of Germanic origin) or stems (especially for words of Latin or Greek origin). Formation of new words, called neologisms, based on Greek or Latin roots (for example television or optometry) is a highly productive process in English and in most modern European languages, so much so that it is often difficult to determine in which language a neologism originated. For this reason, lexicographer Philip Gove attributed many such words to the "international scientific vocabulary" (ISV) when compiling Webster's Third New International Dictionary (1961). Another active word-formation process in English is acronyms,[205] words formed by pronouncing as a single word abbreviations of longer phrases (e.g. NATO, laser). Word origins Main article: Lists of English loanwords by country or language of origin Source languages of English vocabulary[6][206] English, besides forming new words from existing words and their roots, also borrows words from other languages. This process of adding words from other languages is commonplace in many world languages, but English is characterised as being especially open to borrowing of foreign words throughout the last 1,000 years.[207] The most commonly used words in English are West Germanic.[208] The words in English learned first by children as they learn to speak, particularly the grammatical words that dominate the word count of both spoken and written texts, are the Germanic words inherited from the earliest periods of the development of Old English.[201] But one of the consequences of long language contact between French and English in all stages of their development is that the vocabulary of English has a very high percentage of "Latinate" words (derived from French, especially, and also from Latin or from other Romance languages).[209] French words from various periods of the development of French now make up one-third of the vocabulary of English.[210] English has also borrowed many words directly from Latin, the ancestor of the Romance languages, during all stages of its development.[203][201] Many of these words were earlier borrowed into Latin from Greek. Latin or Greek are still highly productive sources of stems used to form vocabulary of subjects learned in higher education such as the sciences, philosophy, and mathematics.[211] English continues to gain new loanwords and calques ("loan translations") from languages all over the world, and words from languages other than the ancestral Anglo-Saxon language make up about 60 percent of the vocabulary of English.[212] English has formal and informal speech registers, and informal registers, including child directed speech, tend to be made up predominantly of words of Anglo-Saxon origin, while the percentage of vocabulary that is of Latinate origin is higher in legal, scientific, and academic texts.[213][214] English loanwords and calques in other languages English has a strong influence on the vocabulary of other languages.[210][215] The influence of English comes from such factors as opinion leaders in other countries knowing the English language, the role of English as a world lingua franca, and the large number of books and films that are translated from English into other languages.[216] That pervasive use of English leads to a conclusion in many places that English is an especially suitable language for expressing new ideas or describing new technologies. Among varieties of English, it is especially American English that influences other languages.[217] Some languages, such as Chinese, write words borrowed from English mostly as calques, while others, such as Japanese, readily take in English loanwords written in sound-indicating script.[218] Dubbed films and television programmes are an especially fruitful source of English influence on languages in Europe.[218] Writing system See also: English alphabet, English braille, and English orthography Since the ninth century, English has been written in a Latin alphabet (also called Roman alphabet). Earlier Old English texts in Anglo-Saxon runes are only short inscriptions. The great majority of literary works in Old English that survive to today are written in the Roman alphabet.[30] The modern English alphabet contains 26 letters of the Latin script: a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, t, u, v, w, x, y, z (which also have capital forms: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W, X, Y, Z). The spelling system, or orthography, of English is multi-layered, with elements of French, Latin, and Greek spelling on top of the native Germanic system.[219] Further complications have arisen through sound changes with which the orthography has not kept pace.[42] Compared to European languages for which official organisations have promoted spelling reforms, English has spelling that is a less consistent indicator of pronunciation and standard spellings of words that are more difficult to guess from knowing how a word is pronounced.[220] There are also systematic spelling differences between British and American English. These situations have prompted proposals for spelling reform in English.[221] Although letters and speech sounds do not have a one-to-one correspondence in standard English spelling, spelling rules that take into account syllable structure, phonetic changes in derived words, and word accent are reliable for most English words.[222] Moreover, standard English spelling shows etymological relationships between related words that would be obscured by a closer correspondence between pronunciation and spelling, for example the words photograph, photography, and photographic,[222] or the words electricity and electrical. While few scholars agree with Chomsky and Halle (1968) that conventional English orthography is "near-optimal",[219] there is a rationale for current English spelling patterns.[223] The standard orthography of English is the most widely used writing system in the world.[224] Standard English spelling is based on a graphomorphemic segmentation of words into written clues of what meaningful units make up each word.[225] Readers of English can generally rely on the correspondence between spelling and pronunciation to be fairly regular for letters or digraphs used to spell consonant sounds. The letters b, d, f, h, j, k, l, m, n, p, r, s, t, v, w, y, z represent, respectively, the phonemes /b, d, f, h, d?, k, l, m, n, p, r, s, t, v, w, j, z/. The letters c and g normally represent /k/ and /?/, but there is also a soft c pronounced /s/, and a soft g pronounced /d?/. The differences in the pronunciations of the letters c and g are often signalled by the following letters in standard English spelling. Digraphs used to represent phonemes and phoneme sequences include ch for /t?/, sh for /?/, th for /?/ or /ð/, ng for /?/, qu for /kw/, and ph for /f/ in Greek-derived words. The single letter x is generally pronounced as /z/ in word-initial position and as /ks/ otherwise. There are exceptions to these generalisations, often the result of loanwords being spelled according to the spelling patterns of their languages of origin[222] or proposals by pedantic scholars in the early period of Modern English to mistakenly follow the spelling patterns of Latin for English words of Germanic origin.[226] For the vowel sounds of the English language, however, correspondences between spelling and pronunciation are more irregular. There are many more vowel phonemes in English than there are vowel letters (a, e, i, o, u, w, y). As a result of a smaller set of single letter symbols than the set of vowel phonemes, some "long vowels" are often indicated by combinations of letters (like the oa in boat, the ow in how, and the ay in stay), or the historically based silent e (as in note and cake).[223] The consequence of this complex orthographic history is that learning to read can be challenging in English. It can take longer for school pupils to become independently fluent readers of English than of many other languages, including Italian, Spanish, or German.[227] Nonetheless, there is an advantage for learners of English reading in learning the specific sound-symbol regularities that occur in the standard English spellings of commonly used words.[222] Such instruction greatly reduces the risk of children experiencing reading difficulties in English.[228][229] Making primary school teachers more aware of the primacy of morpheme representation in English may help learners learn more efficiently to read and write English.[230] English writing also includes a system of punctuation that is similar to the system of punctuation marks used in most alphabetic languages around the world. The purpose of punctuation is to mark meaningful grammatical relationships in sentences to aid readers in understanding a text and to indicate features important for reading a text aloud.[231] Dialects, accents, and varieties Main articles: List of dialects of the English language, World Englishes, and regional accents of English Dialectologists distinguish between English dialects, regional varieties that differ from each other in terms of grammar and vocabulary, and regional accents, distinguished by different patterns of pronunciation. The major native dialects of English are often divided by linguists into the two general categories of the British dialects (BrE) and those of North America (AmE).[232] There also exists a grouping of major native varieties of English in the southern hemisphere, the most prominent being Australian and New Zealand English. UK and Ireland See also: English language in England, Northern England English, Scots language, Scottish English, Welsh English, Estuary English, Ulster English, and Hiberno-English Map showing the main dialect regions in the UK and Ireland As the place where English first evolved, the British Isles, and particularly England, are home to the most variegated pattern of dialects. Within the United Kingdom, the Received Pronunciation (RP), an educated dialect of South East England, is traditionally used as the broadcast standard, and is considered the most prestigious of the British dialects. The spread of RP (also known as BBC English) through the media has caused many traditional dialects of rural England to recede, as youths adopt the traits of the prestige variety instead of traits from local dialects. At the time of the Survey of English Dialects, grammar and vocabulary differed across the country, but a process of lexical attrition has led most of this variation to disappear.[233] Nonetheless this attrition has mostly affected dialectal variation in grammar and vocabulary, and in fact only 3 percent of the English population actually speak RP, the remainder speaking regional accents and dialects with varying degrees of RP influence.[234] There is also variability within RP, particularly along class lines between Upper and Middle class RP speakers and between native RP speakers and speakers who adopt RP later in life.[235] Within Britain there is also considerable variation along lines of social class, and some traits though exceedingly common are considered "non-standard" and are associated with lower class speakers and identities. An example of this is H-dropping, which was historically a feature of lower class London English, particularly Cockney, but which today is the standard in all major English cities—yet it remains largely absent in broadcasting and among the upper crust of British society.[236] Speech example An example of an Essex male with a working-class Estuary accent (entertainer Russell Brand) Problems playing this file? See media help. English in England can be divided into four major dialect regions, Southwest English, South East English, Midlands English, and Northern English. Within each of these regions several local subdialects exist: Within the Northern region, there is a division between the Yorkshire dialects, and the Geordie dialect spoken in Northumbria around Newcastle, and the Lancashire dialects with local urban dialects in Liverpool (Scouse) and Manchester (Mancunian). Having been the centre of Danish occupation during the Viking Invasions, Northern English dialects, particularly the Yorkshire dialect, retain Norse features not found in other English varieties.[237] Since the 15th century, Southeastern varieties centred around London, which has been the centre from which dialectal innovations have spread to other dialects. In London, the Cockney dialect was traditionally used by the lower classes, and it was long a socially stigmatised variety. Today a large area of Southeastern England has adopted traits from Cockney, resulting in the so-called Estuary English which spread in areas south and East of London beginning in the 1980s. Estuary English is distinguished by traits such as the use of intrusive R (drawing is pronounced drawring /?dr??r??/), t-glottalisation (Potter is pronounced with a glottal stop as Po'er /po??/), and the pronunciation of th- as /f/ (thanks pronounced fanks) or /v/ (bother pronounced bover). [238] Speech example An example of a Scottish male with a middle-class Renfrewshire accent Problems playing this file? See media help. Scots is today considered a separate language from English, but it has its origins in early Northern Middle English[239] and developed and changed during its history with influence from other sources, particularly Scots Gaelic and Old Norse. Scots itself has a number of regional dialects. And in addition to Scots, Scottish English are the varieties of Standard English spoken in Scotland, most varieties are Northern English accents, with some influence from Scots.[240] In Ireland, various forms of English have been spoken since the Norman invasions of the 11th century. In County Wexford, in the area surrounding Dublin, two highly conservative dialects known as Forth and Bargy and Fingallian developed as offshoots from Early Middle English, and were spoken until the 19th century. Modern Hiberno-English however has its roots in English colonisation in the 17th century. Today Irish English is divided into Ulster English, a dialect with strong influence from Scots, and southern Hiberno-English. Like Scots and Northern English, the Irish accents preserve the rhoticity which has been lost in most dialects influenced by RP.[17][241] North America Main articles: American English, General American, African American Vernacular English, Southern American English, and Canadian English Rhoticity dominates in North American English. The Atlas of North American English found over 50% non-rhoticity, though, in at least one local white speaker in each U.S. metropolitan area designated here by a red dot. Non-rhotic African American Vernacular English pronunciations may be found among African Americans regardless of location. American English is fairly homogeneous compared to British English. Today, American accent variation is often increasing at the regional level and decreasing at the very local level,[242] though most Americans still speak within a phonological continuum of similar accents,[243] known collectively as General American (GA), with differences hardly noticed even among Americans themselves (such as Midland and Western American English).[244][245][246] In most American and Canadian English, rhoticity (or r-fulness) is dominant, with non-rhoticity (r-dropping) becoming associated with lower prestige and social class especially after World War II; this contrasts with the situation in England, where non-rhoticity has become the standard.[247] Separate from GA are American dialects with clearly distinct sound systems, historically including Southern American English, English of the coastal Northeast (famously including Eastern New England English and New York City English), and African American Vernacular English, all of which are historically non-rhotic. Canadian English, except for the Atlantic provinces and perhaps Quebec, may be classified under GA as well, but it often shows raising of certain vowels, /a?/ and /a?/, before voiceless consonants, as well as distinct norms for written and pronunciation standards.[248] In Southern American English, the largest American "accent group" outside of GA,[249] rhoticity now strongly prevails, replacing the region's historical non-rhotic prestige.[250][251][252] Southern accents are colloquially described as a "drawl" or "twang,"[253] being recognised most readily by the Southern Vowel Shift that begins with glide-deleting in the /a?/ vowel (e.g. pronouncing spy almost like spa), the "Southern breaking" of several front pure vowels into a gliding vowel or even two syllables (e.g. pronouncing the word "press" almost like "pray-us"),[254] the pin–pen merger, and other distinctive phonological, grammatical, and lexical features, many of which are actually recent developments of the 19th century or later.[255] Today spoken primarily by working- and middle-class African Americans, African American Vernacular English (AAVE) is also largely non-rhotic and likely originated among enslaved Africans and African Americans influenced primarily by the non-rhotic, non-standard English dialects of the Old South. A minority of linguists,[256] contrarily, propose that AAVE mostly traces back to African languages spoken by the slaves who had to develop a pidgin or Creole English to communicate with slaves of other ethnic and linguistic origins.[257] AAVE shares important commonalities with older Southern American English and so probably developed to a highly coherent and homogeneous variety in the 19th or early 20th century. AAVE is commonly stigmatised in North America as a form of "broken" or "uneducated" English, also common of modern Southern American English, but linguists today recognise both as fully developed varieties of English with their own norms shared by a large speech community.[258][259] Australia and New Zealand Main articles: Australian English and New Zealand English Since 1788, English has been spoken in Oceania, and Australian English has developed as a first language of the vast majority of the inhabitants of the Australian continent, its standard accent being General Australian. The English of neighbouring New Zealand has to a lesser degree become an influential standard variety of the language.[260] Australian and New Zealand English are most closely related to each other with few differentiating characteristics, followed by South African English and the English of southeastern England, all of which have similarly non-rhotic accents, aside from some accents in the South Island of New Zealand. Australian and New Zealand English stand out for their innovative vowels: many short vowels are fronted or raised, whereas many long vowels have diphthongised. Australian English also has a contrast between long and short vowels, not found in most other varieties. Australian English grammar aligns closely to British and American English; like American English, collective plural subjects take on a singular verb (as in the government is rather than are).[261][262] New Zealand English uses [?] for ?wh-? and its front vowels are often even higher than in Australian English.[263][264][265] Africa, the Caribbean, and South Asia See also: South African English, Caribbean English, and Indian English English is spoken widely in South Africa and is an official or co-official language in several countries. In South Africa, English has been spoken since 1820, co-existing with Afrikaans and various African languages such as the Khoe and Bantu languages. Today about 9 percent of the South African population speak South African English (SAE) as a first language. SAE is a non-rhotic variety, which tends to follow RP as a norm. It is alone among non-rhotic varieties in lacking intrusive r. There are different L2 varieties that differ based on the native language of the speakers.[266] Most phonological differences from RP are in the vowels.[267] Consonant differences include the tendency to pronounce /p, t, t??, k/ without aspiration (e.g. pin pronounced [p?n] rather than as [p??n] as in most other varieties), while r is often pronounced as a flap [?] instead of as the more common fricative.[268] Several varieties of English are also spoken in the Caribbean Islands that were colonial possessions of Britain, including Jamaica, and the Leeward and Windward Islands and Trinidad and Tobago, Barbados, the Cayman Islands, and Belize. Each of these areas are home both to a local variety of English and a local English based creole, combining English and African languages. The most prominent varieties are Jamaican English and Jamaican Creole. In Central America, English based creoles are spoken in on the Caribbean coasts of Nicaragua and Panama. [269] Locals are often fluent both in the local English variety and the local creole languages and code-switching between them is frequent, indeed another way to conceptualise the relationship between Creole and Standard varieties is to see a spectrum of social registers with the Creole forms serving as "basilect" and the more RP-like forms serving as the "acrolect", the most formal register.[270] Most Caribbean varieties are based on British English and consequently most are non-rhotic, except for formal styles of Jamaican English which are often rhotic. Jamaican English differs from RP in its vowel inventory, which has a distinction between long and short vowels rather than tense and lax vowels as in Standard English. The diphthongs /ei/ and /ou/ are monophthongs [e?] and [o?] or even the reverse diphthongs [ie] and [uo] (e.g. bay and boat pronounced [b?e?] and [b?o?t]). Often word final consonant clusters are simplified so that "child" is pronounced [t??ail] and "wind" [win].[271][272][273] As a historical legacy, Indian English tends to take RP as its ideal, and how well this ideal is realised in an individual's speech reflects class distinctions among Indian English speakers. Indian English accents are marked by the pronunciation of phonemes such as /t/ and /d/ (often pronounced with retroflex articulation as [?] and [?]) and the replacement of /?/ and /ð/ with dentals [t?] and [d?]. Sometimes Indian English speakers may also use spelling based pronunciations where the silent ?h? found in words such as ghost is pronounced as an Indian voiced aspirated stop [??].[274] References ^ OxfordLearner'sDictionary 2015, Entry: English – Pronunciation. ^ a b Crystal 2006, pp. 424–426. ^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin; Bank, Sebastian, eds. (2016). "Standard English". Glottolog 2.7. Jena: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History.  ^ Crystal 2003a, p. 6. ^ Wardhaugh 2010, p. 55. ^ a b Finkenstaedt, Thomas; Dieter Wolff (1973). Ordered profusion; studies in dictionaries and the English lexicon. C. Winter. ISBN 3-533-02253-6.  ^ a b Crystal 2003b, pp. 108–109. ^ a b Ethnologue 2010. ^ Crystal 2003b, p. 30. ^ "How English evolved into a global language". BBC. 20 December 2010. Retrieved 9 August 2015.  ^ The Routes of English 2015. ^ König 1994, p. 539. ^ Bammesberger 1992, pp. 29–30. ^ Bammesberger 1992, p. 30. ^ Robinson 1992. ^ Romaine 1982, pp. 56–65. ^ a b Barry 1982, pp. 86–87. ^ Durrell 2006. ^ König & van der Auwera 1994. ^ Harbert 2007. ^ Thomason & Kaufman 1988, pp. 264–265. ^ Watts 2011, Chapter 4. ^ Collingwood & Myres 1936. ^ Graddol, Leith & Swann et al. 2007. ^ Blench & Spriggs 1999. ^ Bosworth & Toller 1921. ^ Campbell 1959, p. 4. ^ Toon 1992, Chapter: Old English Dialects. ^ Donoghue 2008. ^ a b c Gneuss 2013, p. 23. ^ Denison & Hogg 2006, pp. 30–31. ^ Hogg 1992, Chapter 3. Phonology and Morphology. ^ Smith 2009. ^ Trask & Trask 2010. ^ a b Lass 2006, pp. 46–47. ^ Hogg 2006, pp. 360–361. ^ Thomason & Kaufman 1988, pp. 284–290. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 39. ^ Lass 1992. ^ Fischer & van der Wurff 2006, pp. 111–13. ^ Wycliffe, John. "Bible" (PDF). Wesley NNU.  ^ a b Lass 2000. ^ Görlach 1991, pp. 66–70. ^ Nevalainen & Tieken-Boon van Ostade 2006, pp. 274–79. ^ Cercignani 1981. ^ How English evolved into a global language 2010. ^ The Routes of English. ^ Romaine 2006, p. 586. ^ a b Mufwene 2006, p. 614. ^ a b Northrup 2013, pp. 81–86. ^ Baker, Colin (August 1998). "Encyclopedia of Bilingualism and Bilingual Education, page CCCXI". Multilingual Matters Ltd. Retrieved 9 August 2015.  ^ a b c Graddol 2006. ^ a b c Crystal 2003a. ^ a b McCrum, MacNeil & Cran 2003, pp. 9–10. ^ a b Romaine 1999, pp. 1–56. ^ Romaine 1999, p. 2. ^ Leech et al. 2009, pp. 18–19. ^ Mair & Leech 2006. ^ Mair 2006. ^ "Which countries are best at English as a second language?". World Economic Forum. Retrieved 29 November 2016.  ^ a b Crystal 2003a, p. 69. ^ "English". Ethnologue. Retrieved 2016-10-29.  ^ "Chinese, Mandarin". Ethnologue. Retrieved 2016-10-29.  ^ Crystal 2003b, p. 106. ^ a b Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 2. ^ a b Kachru 2006, p. 196. ^ a b Ryan 2013, Table 1. ^ Office for National Statistics 2013, Key Points. ^ National Records of Scotland 2013. ^ Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency 2012, Table KS207NI: Main Language. ^ Statistics Canada 2014. ^ Australian Bureau of Statistics 2013. ^ Statistics South Africa 2012, Table 2.5 Population by first language spoken and province (number). ^ Statistics New Zealand 2014. ^ a b c d Bao 2006, p. 377. ^ Rubino 2006. ^ Patrick 2006a. ^ Lim & Ansaldo 2006. ^ Connell 2006. ^ Schneider 2007. ^ a b Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 5. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 4. ^ European Commission 2012. ^ Kachru 2006, p. 197. ^ Kachru 2006, p. 198. ^ Bao 2006. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 7. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 2. ^ Romaine 1999. ^ Baugh & Cable 2002. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, pp. 8–9. ^ Ammon 2008, p. 1539. ^ Marsh, David (26 November 2010). "Lickety splits: two nations divided by a common language". The Guardian (UK). Retrieved 26 December 2015.  ^ Trudgill 2006. ^ Ammon 2008, pp. 1537–1539. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 122. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, pp. 5–6. ^ Deumert 2006, p. 130. ^ Deumert 2006, p. 131. ^ Crawford, James (1 February 2012). "Language Legislation in the U.S.A.". languagepolicy.net. Retrieved 29 May 2013.  ^ "States with Official English Laws". us-english.org. Retrieved 29 May 2013.  ^ Romaine 1999, p. 5. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 1. ^ Kachru 2006, p. 195. ^ Mazrui & Mazrui 1998. ^ Mesthrie 2010, p. 594. ^ Annamalai 2006. ^ Sailaja 2009, pp. 2–9. ^ "Indiaspeak: English is our 2nd language – The Times of India". The Times of India. Retrieved 5 January 2016.  ^ "Human Development in India: Challenges for a Society in Transition" (PDF). Oxford University Press. 2005. Retrieved 5 January 2016.  ^ Crystal 2004b. ^ Graddol 2010. ^ Meierkord 2006, p. 165. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006, p. 690–91. ^ a b Northrup 2013. ^ Wojcik 2006, p. 139. ^ International Maritime Organization 2011. ^ International Civil Aviation Organization 2011. ^ Gordin 2015. ^ Phillipson 2004, p. 47. ^ ConradRubal-Lopez 1996, p. 261. ^ Richter 2012, p. 29. ^ United Nations 2008. ^ Ammon 2006, p. 321. ^ European Commission 2012, pp. 21, 19. ^ Alcaraz Ariza & Navarro 2006. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006, p. 694–95. ^ Crystal 2002. ^ Jambor 2007. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, Chapter 12: English into the Future. ^ Crystal 2006. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006. ^ Li 2003. ^ Meierkord 2006, p. 163. ^ Wolfram 2006, pp. 334–335. ^ Carr & Honeybone 2007. ^ Bermúdez-Otero & McMahon 2006. ^ MacMahon 2006. ^ International Phonetic Association 1999, pp. 41–42. ^ König 1994, p. 534. ^ Collins & Mees 2003, pp. 47–53. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 13. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 41. ^ Brinton & Brinton 2010, pp. 56–59. ^ Collins & Mees 2003, pp. 46–50. ^ Brinton & Brinton 2010, p. 60. ^ König 1994, pp. 537–538. ^ International Phonetic Association 1999, p. 42. ^ Oxford Learner's Dictionary 2015, Entry "contract". ^ Merriam Webster 2015, Entry "contract". ^ Macquarie Dictionary 2015, Entry "contract". ^ Brinton & Brinton 2010, p. 66. ^ a b Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 4–6. ^ Roach 2009, p. 53. ^ Giegerich 1992, p. 36. ^ Lass 2000, p. 114. ^ Wells 1982, pp. xviii-xix. ^ Wells 1982, p. 493. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 22. ^ Aarts & Haegeman (2006), p. 118. ^ Payne & Huddleston 2002. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 56–57. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 55. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 54–5. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 57. ^ a b König 1994, p. 540. ^ Mair 2006, pp. 148–49. ^ Leech 2006, p. 69. ^ O'Dwyer 2006. ^ Greenbaum & Nelson 2002. ^ Sweet 2014, p. 52. ^ Jespersen 2007. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 425–26. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 426. ^ a b Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 51. ^ König 1994, p. 541. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 50. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 208–210. ^ a b Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 51–52. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 210–11. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 50–51. ^ Dixon 1982. ^ McArthur 1992, pp. 64, 610–611. ^ König 1994, p. 553. ^ König 1994, p. 550. ^ König 1994, p. 551. ^ Miller 2002, pp. 60–69. ^ König 1994, p. 545. ^ König 1994, p. 557. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 114. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 786–790. ^ Miller 2002, pp. 26–27. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 7-8. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 1365–70. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 1370. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 1366. ^ Halliday & Hasan 1976. ^ Schiffrin 1988. ^ a b HowManyWords 2015. ^ Sheidlower 2006. ^ a b c d e Algeo 1999. ^ Leech et al. 2009, pp. 24–50. ^ a b c Kastovsky 2006. ^ a b Crystal 2003b, p. 129. ^ Crystal 2003b, pp. 120–121. ^ "Joseph M. Willams, Origins of the English Language at". Amazon.com. Retrieved 2010-04-21.  ^ Denning, Kessler & Leben 2007, p. 7. ^ Nation 2001, p. 265. ^ Denning, Kessler & Leben 2007. ^ a b Gottlieb 2006, p. 196. ^ Romaine 1999, p. 4. ^ Fasold & Connor-Linton 2014, p. 302. ^ Crystal 2003b, pp. 124–127. ^ Algeo 1999, pp. 80–81. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006, p. 692. ^ Gottlieb 2006, p. 197. ^ Gottlieb 2006, p. 198. ^ a b Gottlieb 2006, p. 202. ^ a b Swan 2006, p. 149. ^ Mountford 2006. ^ Neijt 2006. ^ a b c d Daniels & Bright 1996, p. 653. ^ a b Abercrombie & Daniels 2006. ^ Mountford 2006, p. 156. ^ Mountford 2006, pp. 157–158. ^ Daniels & Bright 1996, p. 654. ^ Dehaene 2009. ^ McGuinness 1997. ^ Shaywitz 2003. ^ Mountford 2006, pp. 159. ^ Lawler 2006, p. 290. ^ Crystal 2003b, p. 107. ^ Trudgill 2000, p. 125. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 3. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 37. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 40. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 31. ^ Trudgill 2000, pp. 80–81. ^ Aitken & McArthur 1979, p. 81. ^ Romaine 1982. ^ Hickey 2007. ^ Labov 2012. ^ Wells 1982, p. 34. ^ Rowicka 2006. ^ Toon 1982. ^ Cassidy 1982. ^ Labov 1972. ^ Boberg 2010. ^ "Do You Speak American: What Lies Ahead". PBS. Retrieved 15 August 2007.  ^ Thomas, Erik R. (2003), "Rural White Southern Accents" (PDF), Atlas of North American English (online), Mouton de Gruyter, p. 16. [Later published as a chapter in: Bernd Kortmann and Edgar W. Schneider (eds) (2004). A Handbook of Varieties of English: A Multimedia Reference Tool. New York: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 300-324.]  ^ Levine & Crockett 1966. ^ Schönweitz 2001. ^ Montgomery 1993. ^ Thomas 2008, p. 95–96. ^ Bailey 1997. ^ McWhorter, John H. (2001). Word on the Street: Debunking the Myth of a "Pure" Standard English. Basic Books. p. 162.  ^ Bailey 2001. ^ Green 2002. ^ Patrick 2006b. ^ Eagleson 1982. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 16–21. ^ Burridge 2010. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 24–26. ^ Maclagan 2010. ^ Gordon, Campbell & Hay et al. 2004. ^ Lanham 1982. ^ Lass 2002. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 30–31. ^ Lawton 1982. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, p. 115. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 117–18. ^ Lawton 1982, p. 256–60. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 115–16. ^ Sailaja 2009, pp. 19–24. Bibliography Aarts, Bas; Haegeman, Liliane (2006). "6. English Word classes and Phrases". In Aarts, Bas; McMahon, April. The Handbook of English Linguistics. Blackwell Publishing Ltd.  Abercrombie, D.; Daniels, Peter T. (2006). "Spelling Reform Proposals: English". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04878-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Aitken, A. J.; McArthur, Tom, eds. (1979). Languages of Scotland. Occasional paper – Association for Scottish Literary Studies; no. 4. Edinburgh: Chambers. ISBN 978-0-550-20261-1.  Alcaraz Ariza, M. Á.; Navarro, F. (2006). "Medicine: Use of English". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 752–759. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/02351-8. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Algeo, John (1999). "Chapter 2:Vocabulary". In Romaine, Suzanne. Cambridge History of the English Language. IV: 1776–1997. Cambridge University Press. pp. 57–91. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521264778.003. ISBN 978-0-521-26477-8.  Ammon, Ulrich (November 2006). "Language Conflicts in the European Union: On finding a politically acceptable and practicable solution for EU institutions that satisfies diverging interests". International Journal of Applied Linguistics. 16 (3): 319–338. doi:10.1111/j.1473-4192.2006.00121.x.  Ammon, Ulrich (2008). "Pluricentric and Divided Languages". In Ammon, Ulrich N.; Dittmar, Norbert; Mattheier, Klaus J.; et al. Sociolinguistics: An International Handbook of the Science of Language and Society / Soziolinguistik Ein internationales Handbuch zur Wissenschaft vov Sprache and Gesellschaft. Handbooks of Linguistics and Communication Science / Handbücher zur Sprach- und Kommunikationswissenschaft 3/2. 2 (2nd completely revised and extended ed.). de Gruyter. ISBN 978-3-11-019425-8. Retrieved 19 December 2014 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Annamalai, E. (2006). "India: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 610–613. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04611-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Australian Bureau of Statistics (28 March 2013). "2011 Census QuickStats: Australia". Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Bailey, Guy (2001). "Chapter 3: The relationship between African American and White Vernaculars". In Lanehart, Sonja L. Sociocultural and historical contexts of African American English. Varieties of English around the World. John Benjamins. pp. 53–84. ISBN 978-1-58811-046-6.  Bailey, G. (1997). "When did southern American English begin". In Edgar W. Schneider. Englishes around the world. pp. 255–275.  Bammesberger, Alfred (1992). "Chapter 2: The Place of English in Germanic and Indo-European". In Hogg, Richard M. The Cambridge History of the English Language. 1: The Beginnings to 1066. Cambridge University Press. pp. 26–66. ISBN 978-0-521-26474-7.  Bao, Z. (2006). "Variation in Nonnative Varieties of English". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 377–380. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04257-7. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Barry, Michael V. (1982). "English in Ireland". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 84–134. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Bauer, Laurie; Huddleston, Rodney (15 April 2002). "Chapter 19: Lexical Word-Formation". In Huddleston, Rodney; Pullum, Geoffrey K. The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 1621–1721. ISBN 978-0-521-43146-0. Retrieved 10 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (10 February 2015).  Baugh, Albert C.; Cable, Thomas (2002). A History of the English Language (5th ed.). Longman. ISBN 978-0-13-015166-7.  Bermúdez-Otero, Ricardo; McMahon, April (2006). "Chapter 17: English phonology and morphology". In Bas Aarts; April McMahon. The Handbook of English Linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 382–410. doi:10.1111/b.9781405113823.2006.00018.x. ISBN 978-1-4051-6425-2. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  Blench, R.; Spriggs, Matthew (1999). Archaeology and Language: Correlating Archaeological and Linguistic Hypotheses. Routledge. pp. 285–286. ISBN 978-0-415-11761-6.  Boberg, Charles (2010). The English language in Canada: Status, history and comparative analysis. Studies in English Language. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-139-49144-0. Lay summary (2 April 2015).  Bosworth, Joseph; Toller, T. Northcote (1921). "Engla land". An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary (Online). Charles University. Retrieved 6 March 2015.  Brinton, Laurel J.; Brinton, Donna M. (2010). The linguistic structure of modern English. John Benjamins. ISBN 978-902728824-0. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  Brutt-Griffler, J. (2006). "Languages of Wider Communication". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 690–697. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00644-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Burridge, Kate (2010). "Chapter 7: English in Australia". In Kirkpatrick, Andy. The Routledge handbook of world Englishes. Routledge. pp. 132–151. ISBN 978-0-415-62264-6. Lay summary (29 March 2015).  Campbell, Alistair (1959). Old English Grammar. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-811943-7.  Carr, Philip; Honeybone, Patrick (2007). "English phonology and linguistic theory: an introduction to issues, and to 'Issues in English Phonology'". Language Sciences. 29 (2): 117–153. doi:10.1016/j.langsci.2006.12.018. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Cassidy, Frederic G. (1982). "Geographical Variation of English in the United States". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 177–210. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Cercignani, Fausto (1981). Shakespeare's works and Elizabethan pronunciation. Clarendon Press. Retrieved 14 March 2015. Lay summary (15 March 2015).  Collingwood, Robin George; Myres, J. N. L. (1936). "Chapter XX. The Sources for the period: Angles, Saxons, and Jutes on the Continent". Roman Britain and the English Settlements. Book V: The English Settlements. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press. LCCN 37002621. Lay summary (15 March 2015).  Collins, Beverley; Mees, Inger M. (2003) [First published 1981]. The Phonetics of English and Dutch (PDF) (5th ed.). Leiden: Brill Publishers. ISBN 9004103406.  Connell, B. A. (2006). "Nigeria: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 88–90. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01655-2. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 25 March 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Conrad, Andrew W.; Rubal-Lopez, Alma (1 January 1996). Post-Imperial English: Status Change in Former British and American Colonies, 1940–1990. de Gruyter. p. 261. ISBN 978-3-11-087218-7. Retrieved 2 April 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Crystal, David (2002). Language Death. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139106856. ISBN 978-1-139-10685-6. Retrieved 25 February 2015.  Crystal, David (2003a). English as a Global Language (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 69. ISBN 978-0-521-53032-3. Retrieved 4 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) – Library of Congress (sample) (4 February 2015).  Crystal, David (2003b). The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-53033-4. Retrieved 4 February 2015. Lay summary (4 February 2015).  Crystal, David (2004). "Subcontinent Raises Its Voice". The Guardian. Retrieved 4 February 2015.  Crystal, David (2006). "Chapter 9: English worldwide". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 420–439. ISBN 978-0-511-16893-2.  Daniels, Peter T.; Bright, William, eds. (6 June 1996). The World's Writing Systems. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-507993-7. Retrieved 23 February 2015. Lay summary (23 February 2015).  Dehaene, Stanislas (2009). Reading in the Brain: The Science and Evolution of a Human Invention. Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-02110-9. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Lay summary (3 April 2015).  Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. (2006). "Overview". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 30–31. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Denning, Keith; Kessler, Brett; Leben, William Ronald (17 February 2007). English Vocabulary Elements. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-516803-7. Retrieved 25 February 2015. Lay summary (25 February 2015).  Department for Communities and Local Government (United Kingdom) (27 February 2007). Second Report submitted by the United Kingdom pursuant to article 25, paragraph 1 of the framework convention for the protection of national minorities (PDF) (Report). Council of Europe. ACFC/SR/II(2007)003 rev1. Retrieved 6 March 2015.  Deumert, A. (2006). "Migration and Language". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 129–133. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01294-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Dixon, R. M. W. (1982). "The grammar of English phrasal verbs". Australian Journal of Linguistics. 2 (1): 1–42. doi:10.1080/07268608208599280.  Donoghue, D. (2008). Old English Literature: A Short Introduction. Wiley. doi:10.1002/9780470776025. ISBN 978-0-631-23486-9. Retrieved 16 March 2015.  Durrell, M. (2006). "Germanic Languages". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 53–55. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/02189-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Eagleson, Robert D. (1982). "English in Australia and New Zealand". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 415–438. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  "Summary by language size". Ethnologue: Languages of the World. Retrieved 10 February 2015.  European Commission (June 2012). Special Eurobarometer 386: Europeans and Their Languages (PDF) (Report). Eurobarometer Special Surveys. Retrieved 12 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (27 March 2015).  Fasold, Ralph W.; Connor-Linton, Jeffrey, eds. (2014). An Introduction to Language and Linguistics (Second ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-316-06185-5.  Fischer, Olga; van der Wurff, Wim (2006). "Chapter 3: Syntax". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 109–198. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Giegerich, Heinz J. (1992). English Phonology: An Introduction. Cambridge Textbooks in Linguistics. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-33603-1.  Gneuss, Helmut (2013). "Chapter 2: The Old English Language". In Godden, Malcolm; Lapidge, Michael. The Cambridge companion to Old English literature (Second ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 19–49. ISBN 978-0-521-15402-4.  Görlach, Manfred (1991). Introduction to Early Modern English. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-32529-3.  Gordin, Michael D. (4 February 2015). "Absolute English". Aeon. Retrieved 16 February 2015.  Gordon, Elizabeth; Campbell, Lyle; Hay, Jennifer; Maclagan, Margaret; Sudbury, Angela; Trudgill, Peter (2004). New Zealand English: its origins and evolution. Studies in English Language. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-10895-9.  Gottlieb, H. (2006). "Linguistic Influence". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 196–206. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04455-2. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Graddol, David (2006). English Next: Why global English may mean the end of 'English as a Foreign Language' (PDF). The British Council. Retrieved 7 February 2015. Lay summary – ELT Journal (7 February 2015).  Graddol, David (2010). English Next India: The future of English in India (PDF). The British Council. ISBN 978-0-86355-627-2. Retrieved 7 February 2015. Lay summary – ELT Journal (7 February 2015).  Graddol, David; Leith, Dick; Swann, Joan; Rhys, Martin; Gillen, Julia, eds. (2007). Changing English. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-37679-2. Retrieved 11 February 2015.  Green, Lisa J. (2002). African American English: a linguistic introduction. Cambridge University Press.  Greenbaum, S.; Nelson, G. (1 January 2002). An introduction to English grammar (Second ed.). Longman. ISBN 978-0-582-43741-8.  Halliday, M. A. K.; Hasan, Ruqaiya (1976). Cohesion in English. Pearson Education ltd.  Hancock, Ian F.; Angogo, Rachel (1982). "English in East Africa". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 415–438. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Harbert, Wayne (2007). The Germanic Languages. Cambridge Language Surveys. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511755071. ISBN 978-0-521-01511-0. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Lay summary – Language (journal of the Linguistic Society of America) (26 February 2015).  Hickey, R. (2007). Irish English: History and present-day forms. Cambridge University Press.  Hickey, R., ed. (2005). Legacies of colonial English: Studies in transported dialects. Cambridge University Press.  Hogg, Richard M. (1992). "Chapter 3: Phonology and Morphology". In Hogg, Richard M. The Cambridge History of the English Language. 1: The Beginnings to 1066. Cambridge University Press. pp. 67–168. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521264747. ISBN 978-0-521-26474-7.  Hogg, Richard M. (2006). "Chapter7: English in Britain". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 360–61. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  "How English evolved into a global language". BBC. 20 December 2010. Retrieved 9 August 2015.  "How many words are there in the English language?". Oxford Dictionaries Online. Oxford University Press. 2015. Retrieved 2 April 2015. How many words are there in the English language? There is no single sensible answer to this question. It's impossible to count the number of words in a language, because it's so hard to decide what actually counts as a word.  Huddleston, Rodney; Pullum, Geoffrey K. (15 April 2002). The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-43146-0. Retrieved 10 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (10 February 2015).  Hughes, Arthur; Trudgill, Peter (1996). English Accents and Dialects (3rd ed.). Arnold Publishers.  International Civil Aviation Organization (2011). "Personnel Licensing FAQ". International Civil Aviation Organization – Air Navigation Bureau. In which languages does a licence holder need to demonstrate proficiency?. Retrieved 16 December 2014. Controllers working on stations serving designated airports and routes used by international air services shall demonstrate language proficiency in English as well as in any other language(s) used by the station on the ground.  International Maritime Organization (2011). "IMO Standard Marine Communication Phrases". Retrieved 16 December 2014.  International Phonetic Association (1999). Handbook of the International Phonetic Association: A guide to the use of the International Phonetic Alphabet. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-65236-7.  Jambor, Paul Z. (December 2007). "English Language Imperialism: Points of View". Journal of English as an International Language. 2: 103–123.  Jespersen, Otto (2007) [1924]. "Case: The number of English cases". The Philosophy of Grammar. Routledge.  Kachru, B. (2006). "English: World Englishes". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 195–202. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00645-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Kastovsky, Dieter (2006). "Chapter 4: Vocabulary". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 199–270. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  König, Ekkehard; van der Auwera, Johan, eds. (1994). The Germanic Languages. Routledge Language Family Descriptions. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-28079-2. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Lay summary (26 February 2015).  The survey of the Germanic branch languages includes chapters by Winfred P. Lehmann, Ans van Kemenade, John Ole Askedal, Erik Andersson, Neil Jacobs, Silke Van Ness, and Suzanne Romaine. König, Ekkehard (1994). "17. English". In König, Ekkehard; van der Auwera, Johan. The Germanic Languages. Routledge Language Family Descriptions. Routledge. pp. 532–562. ISBN 978-0-415-28079-2. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Lay summary (26 February 2015).  Labov, W. (1972). "13. The Social Stratification of (R) in New York City Department Stores". Sociolinguistic patterns. University of Pennsylvania Press.  Labov, W. (2012). "1. About Language and Language Change". Dialect Diversity in America: The Politics of Language Change. University of Virginia Press.  Labov, William; Ash, Sharon; Boberg, Charles (2006). The Atlas of North American English. Berlin: de Gruyter. ISBN 3-11-016746-8. Retrieved 2 April 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Lanham, L. W. (1982). "English in South Africa". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 324–352. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Lass, Roger (1992). "2. Phonology and Morphology". In Blake, Norman. Cambridge History of the English Language. II: 1066–1476. Cambridge University Press. pp. 103–123.  Lass, Roger (2000). "Chapter 3: Phonology and Morphology". In Lass, Roger. The Cambridge History of the English Language, Volume III: 1476–1776. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 56–186.  Lass, Roger (2002), "South African English", in Mesthrie, Rajend, Language in South Africa, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-79105-2  Lass, Roger (2006). "Chapter 2: Phonology and Morphology". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 46–47. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Lawler, J. (2006). "Punctuation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 290–291. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04573-9. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Lawton, David L. (1982). "English in the Caribbean". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 251–280. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Leech, G. N. (2006). A glossary of English grammar. Edinburgh University Press.  Leech, Geoffrey; Hundt, Marianne; Mair, Christian; Smith, Nicholas (22 October 2009). Change in contemporary English: a grammatical study (PDF). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86722-1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 22 September 2016. Lay summary (PDF) (29 March 2015).  Levine, L.; Crockett, H. J. (1966). "Speech Variation in a Piedmont Community: Postvocalic r*". Sociological Inquiry. 36 (2): 204–226. doi:10.1111/j.1475-682x.1966.tb00625.x.  Li, David C. S. (2003). "Between English and Esperanto: what does it take to be a world language?". International Journal of the Sociology of Language. 2003 (164): 33–63. doi:10.1515/ijsl.2003.055. ISSN 0165-2516. Retrieved 27 March 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Lim, L.; Ansaldo, U. (2006). "Singapore: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of Language & Linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 387–389. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01701-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Maclagan, Margaret (2010). "Chapter 8: The English(es) of New Zealand". In Kirkpatrick, Andy. The Routledge handbook of world Englishes. Routledge. pp. 151–164. ISBN 978-0-203-84932-3. Lay summary (29 March 2015).  MacMahon, M. K. (2006). "16. English Phonetics". In Bas Aarts; April McMahon. The Handbook of English Linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 359–382.  "Macquarie Dictionary". Australia's National Dictionary & Thesaurus Online | Macquarie Dictionary. Macmillan Publishers Group Australia. 2015. Retrieved 15 February 2015. (registration required (help)).  Mair, C.; Leech, G. (2006). "14 Current Changes in English Syntax". The handbook of English linguistics.  Mair, Christian (2006). Twentieth-century English: History, variation and standardization. Cambridge University Press.  Mazrui, Ali A.; Mazrui, Alamin (3 August 1998). The Power of Babel: Language and Governance in the African Experience. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-51429-1. Retrieved 15 February 2015. Lay summary (15 February 2015).  McArthur, Tom, ed. (1992). The Oxford Companion to the English Language. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-214183-5. Lay summary (15 February 2015).  McCrum, Robert; MacNeil, Robert; Cran, William (2003). The Story of English (Third Revised ed.). London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-200231-5.  McGuinness, Diane (1997). Why Our Children Can't Read, and what We Can Do about it: A Scientific Revolution in Reading. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-83161-9. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Lay summary (3 April 2015).  Meierkord, C. (2006). "Lingua Francas as Second Languages". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 163–171. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00641-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) "English". Merriam-webster.com. 26 February 2015. Retrieved 26 February 2015.  Mesthrie, Rajend (2010). "New Englishes and the native speaker debate". Language Sciences. 32: 594–601. doi:10.1016/j.langsci.2010.08.002. ISSN 0388-0001. Retrieved 17 February 2015.  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Miller, Jim (2002). An Introduction to English Syntax. Edinburgh University Press.  Montgomery, M. (1993). "The Southern Accent—Alive and Well". Southern Cultures. 1 (1): 47–64.  Mountford, J. (2006). "English Spelling: Rationale". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 156–159. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05018-5. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Mufwene, S. S. (2006). "Language Spread". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 613–616. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01291-8. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Nation, I. S. P. (15 March 2001). Learning Vocabulary in Another Language. Cambridge University Press. p. 477. ISBN 0-521-80498-1. Retrieved 4 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (4 February 2015).  National Records of Scotland (26 September 2013). "Census 2011: Release 2A". Scotland's Census 2011. Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Neijt, A. (2006). "Spelling Reform". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 68–71. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04574-0. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Nevalainen, Terttu; Tieken-Boon van Ostade, Ingrid (2006). "Chapter 5: Standardization". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency (11 December 2012). "Census 2011: Key Statistics for Northern Ireland December 2012" (PDF). Statistics Bulletin. Table KS207NI: Main Language. Retrieved 16 December 2014.  Northrup, David (20 March 2013). How English Became the Global Language. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-137-30306-6. Retrieved 25 March 2015. Lay summary (25 March 2015).  O'Dwyer, Bernard (2006). Modern English Structures, second edition: Form, Function, and Position. Broadview Press.  Office for National Statistics (4 March 2013). "Language in England and Wales, 2011". 2011 Census Analysis. Retrieved 16 December 2014.  "Oxford Learner's Dictionaries". Oxford. Retrieved 25 February 2015.  Patrick, P. L. (2006a). "Jamaica: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 88–90. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01760-0. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Patrick, P. L. (2006b). "English, African-American Vernacular". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 159–163. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05092-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Payne, John; Huddleston, Rodney (2002). "5. Nouns and noun phrases". In Huddleston, R.; Pullum, G. K. The Cambridge Grammar of English. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 323–522.  Phillipson, Robert (28 April 2004). English-Only Europe?: Challenging Language Policy. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-44349-9. Retrieved 15 February 2015.  Richter, Ingo (1 January 2012). "Introduction". In Richter, Dagmar; Richter, Ingo; Toivanen, Reeta; et al. Language Rights Revisited: The challenge of global migration and communication. BWV Verlag. ISBN 978-3-8305-2809-8. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  Roach, Peter (1991). English Phonetics and Phonology (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.  Roach, Peter (2009). English Phonetics and Phonology (4th ed.). Cambridge.  Robinson, Orrin (1992). Old English and Its Closest Relatives: A Survey of the Earliest Germanic Languages. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-2221-6. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Romaine, Suzanne (1982). "English in Scotland". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 56–83. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Romaine, Suzanne (1999). "Chapter 1: Introduction". In Romaine, Suzanne. Cambridge History of the English Language. IV: 1776–1997. Cambridge University Press. pp. 1–56. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521264778.002. ISBN 978-0-521-26477-8.  Romaine, S. (2006). "Language Policy in Multilingual Educational Contexts". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 584–596. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00646-5. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) "The Routes of English". 1 August 2015.  Rowicka, G. J. (2006). "Canada: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 194–195. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01848-4. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Rubino, C. (2006). "Philippines: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 323–326. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01736-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Ryan, Camille (August 2013). "Language Use in the United States: 2011" (PDF). American Community Survey Reports. p. 1. Retrieved 16 December 2014.  Sailaja, Pingali (2009). Indian English. Dialects of English. Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 978-0-7486-2595-6. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Schiffrin, Deborah (1988). Discourse Markers. Studies in Interactional Sociolinguistics. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-35718-0. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Schneider, Edgar (2007). Postcolonial English: Varieties Around the World. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-53901-2. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Schönweitz, Thomas (2001). "Gender and Postvocalic /r/ in the American South: A Detailed Socioregional Analysis". American Speech. 76 (3): 259–285. doi:10.1215/00031283-76-3-259.  Shaywitz, Sally E. (2003). Overcoming Dyslexia: A New and Complete Science-based Program for Reading Problems at Any Level. A.A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-375-40012-4. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Lay summary (3 April 2015).  Sheidlower, Jesse (10 April 2006). "How many words are there in English?". Retrieved 2 April 2015. The problem with trying to number the words in any language is that it's very hard to agree on the basics. For example, what is a word?  Smith, Jeremy J. (2 April 2009). Old English: a linguistic introduction. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86677-4.  Statistics Canada (22 August 2014). "Population by mother tongue and age groups (total), 2011 counts, for Canada, provinces and territories". Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Statistics New Zealand (April 2014). "2013 QuickStats About Culture and Identity" (PDF). p. 23. Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Lehohla, Pali, ed. (2012). "Population by first language spoken and province" (PDF). Census 2011: Census in Brief (PDF). Pretoria: Statistics South Africa. p. 23. ISBN 978-0-621-41388-5. Report No. 03?01?41. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 November 2015.  Svartvik, Jan; Leech, Geoffrey (12 December 2006). English – One Tongue, Many Voices. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-4039-1830-7. Retrieved 5 March 2015. Lay summary (16 March 2015).  Swan, M. (2006). "English in the Present Day (Since ca. 1900)". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 149–156. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05058-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Sweet, Henry (2014) [1892]. A New English Grammar. Cambridge University Press.  Thomas, Erik R. (2008). "Rural Southern white accents". In Edgar W. Schneider. Varieties of English. 2: The Americas and the Caribbean. de Gruyter. pp. 87–114. Retrieved 2 April 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Thomason, Sarah G.; Kaufman, Terrence (1988). Language Contact, Creolization and Genetic Linguistics. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-91279-3.  Todd, Loreto (1982). "The English language in West Africa". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 281–305. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Toon, Thomas E. (1982). "Variation in Contemporary American English". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 210–250. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Toon, Thomas E. (1992). "Old English Dialects". In Hogg, Richard M. The Cambridge History of the English Language. 1: The Beginnings to 1066. Cambridge University Press. pp. 409–451. ISBN 978-0-521-26474-7.  Trask, Larry; Trask, Robert Lawrence (January 2010). Why Do Languages Change?. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83802-3. Retrieved 5 March 2015.  Trudgill, Peter (2000). The Dialects of England (2nd ed.). Oxford: Blackwell. ISBN 978-0-631-21815-9. Lay summary (27 March 2015).  Trudgill, P. (2006). "Accent". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. p. 14. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01506-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Trudgill, Peter; Hannah, Jean (2002). International English: A Guide to the Varieties of Standard English (4th ed.). London: Hodder Education. ISBN 0-340-80834-9.  Trudgill, Peter; Hannah, Jean (1 January 2008). International English: A Guide to the Varieties of Standard English (5th ed.). London: Arnold. ISBN 978-0-340-97161-1. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 26 March 2015. Lay summary (26 March 2015).  United Nations (2008). "Everything You Always Wanted to Know About the United Nations" (PDF). Retrieved 4 April 2015. The working languages at the UN Secretariat are English and French.  Wardhaugh, Ronald (2010). An Introduction to Sociolinguistics. Blackwell textbooks in Linguistics; 4 (Sixth ed.). Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4051-8668-1.  Watts, Richard J. (3 March 2011). Language Myths and the History of English. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195327601.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-532760-1. Retrieved 10 March 2015. Lay summary (10 March 2015).  Wells, J.C. (1982). Accents of English, I, II, III. Cambridge University Press.  Wojcik, R. H. (2006). "Controlled Languages". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 139–142. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05081-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Wolfram, W. (2006). "Variation and Language: Overview". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of Language & Linguistics. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 333–341. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04256-5. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) External links Find more aboutEnglish languageat Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Textbooks from Wikibooks Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Accents of English from Around the World (University of Edinburgh) Sound files comparing how 110 words are pronounced in 50 English accents from around the world Articles related to the English language Linguistics v t e Description of the English language Grammar Phonology Stress and reduced vowels Orthography Alphabet Braille Dialects Language history Phonological history v t e History of English Proto-Indo-European Proto-Germanic Proto-West-Germanic Anglo-Frisian languages Old English Anglo-Norman language Middle English Early Modern English Modern English Phonological history General Old English Vowels Great Vowel Shift low unrounded vowels low back vowels high back vowels high front vowels diphthongs changes before historic /l/ changes before historic /r/ trisyllabic laxing Northern Cities Vowel Shift Consonants rhoticity flapping t-glottalization l-vocalization consonant clusters h-dropping wh th th-fronting ð (eth) þ (thorn) th-stopping v t e Dialects and accents of Modern English by continent Europe United Kingdom England   Varieties by common name Barrovian Black Country Brummie Bristolian Cheshire Cockney "Mockney" Cornish Cumbrian East Anglian East Midlands Essex Estuary Geordie Kentish Lancastrian Mackem Mancunian Multicultural London Norfolk Northern Pitmatic Potteries Received Pronunciation Scouse Southern Suffolk Sussex West Country "Mummerset" West Midlands Yorkshire   Varieties by geographic location East of England Essex Norfolk Suffolk East Midlands North Cheshire Cumbria [Barrow] Lancashire Manchester Merseyside Sunderland Tyneside Yorkshire South Kent Thames Estuary; London [Multicultural London] Sussex West Country Bristol Cornwall Dorset West Midlands Black Country Birmingham Stoke-on-Trent Northern Ireland Mid Ulster Ulster Scots Scotland Glasgow Highlands Lowlands Wales Cardiff Gower Ireland Dublin D4 South-West Cork Supraregional Ulster Channel Islands Alderney Guernsey Jersey Elsewhere Gibraltar Isle of Man Malta North and South America United States   Varieties by common name African American Appalachian Boston Cajun California Chicago; Detroit; Great Lakes Chicano Mid-Atlantic Philadelphia; South Jersey Baltimorese General American High Tider Maine Miami Midland Midwestern New England New Mexican New York Northeast Pennsylvania Old Southern Ozark Pacific Northwest Pennsylvania Dutch Pittsburghese Rhode Island Southern Texan Upper Midwestern Western Vermont Yat Yeshivish Yooper   Varieties by geographic location Delaware Valley; Mid-Atlantic Pennsylvania Dutch Philadelphia; South Jersey Baltimore Midland Midwest Great Lakes; Inland North Upper Midwest Upper Peninsula of Michigan New England Boston Maine Rhode Island Vermont New York City; North Jersey New York Latino North Northeast Pennsylvania South Acadiana Appalachia Chesapeake; Pamlico Miami New Orleans Ozarks Texas West California New Mexico Pacific Northwest Western Pennsylvania Canada Aboriginal Atlantic Cape Breton Newfoundland Lunenburg Standard Ottawa Valley Pacific Northwest Quebec Caribbean Bahamas Barbados Dominican Republic Jamaica Puerto Rico Trinidad Elsewhere Bermuda Falkland Islands Guyana Oceania Australia Aboriginal Broad; Strine General South Australian Torres Strait West Australian Elsewhere Fiji New Zealand Palau Solomon Islands Other continents Africa Cameroon Ghana Kenya Liberia Malawi Namibia Nigeria Sierra Leone South Africa Afrikaans Black Cape Flats Indian White Uganda Asia Bangladesh Brunei Burma or Myanmar Hong Kong India Malaysia Nepal Pakistan Philippines Singapore Sri Lanka v t e Modern Germanic languages and dialects North Germanic West Scandinavian Bergensk Elfdalian Faroese Gøtudanskt Icelandic Jamtlandic Norwegian Bokmål Nynorsk Sognamål Trøndersk Valdris Vestlandsk Vikværsk East Scandinavian Bornholmsk Dalecarlian Danish Insular Danish Jutlandic South Perkerdansk Gutnish Kalix Kebabnorsk Kiruna Luleå Norrland Småländska South Swedish Scanian Stockholm Rinkeby Uppländska Västgötska Westrobothnian Swedish Åland Estonia Finland Ostrobothnia West Germanic Anglo- Frisian English English dialects North Frisian Saterland Frisian Scots West Frisian Low Franconian Dutch Hollandic West Flemish Zeelandic East Flemish Brabantian Limburgish Meuse-Rhenish Afrikaans Low German/ Low Saxon Dutch Low Saxon Northern Low Saxon Westphalian Eastphalian Mecklenburgisch-Vorpommersch Brandenburgisch East Pomeranian Central Pomeranian Low Prussian High German Standard German German Swiss Austrian Central German Ripuarian Moselle Franconian Luxembourgish Lorraine Franconian Rhine Franconian Hessian Thuringian Upper Saxon High Prussian Lausitzisch-neumärkisch Silesian Upper German East Franconian South Franconian Northern Bavarian Central Bavarian Southern Bavarian Swabian Low Alemannic Central Alemannic High Alemannic Highest Alemannic Swiss German Yiddish v t e Dictionaries of English Old and Middle English An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary Dictionary of Old English Middle English Dictionary Historic Catholicon Anglicum (1483) The English Schoole-Master (1596) The New World of English Words (1658) A New English Dictionary (1702) An Universal Etymological English Dictionary (1721) A Dictionary of the English Language (1755) Webster's Dictionary (1828) Worcester's Dictionary Richardson's New Dictionary Imperial Dictionary (1847–50) Century Dictionary (1889–91) American English American Heritage Dictionary of American English Dictionary of American Regional English Encarta New Oxford American Oxford American Random House Webster's Webster's New World Webster's Third New International Dictionary World Book Dictionary British English Chambers Collins Oxford English Concise Oxford English Compact Oxford English Shorter Oxford English Historical Thesaurus Oxford Dictionary of English Penguin Canadian English Canadian Oxford Dictionary of Canadianisms Gage Canadian (Full list) Australian English Australian National Australian Oxford Macquarie Online Wiktionary Collaborative International Dictionary of English OmegaWiki Urban Dictionary Wordnik Learners / ESL Cambridge Advanced Learner's Collins COBUILD Advanced Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners Merriam-Webster's Advanced Learner's Oxford Advanced Learner's Geopolitical use v t e English-speaking world Click on a coloured area to see an article about English in that country or region Further links Articles English-speaking world History of the English language British Empire English in the Commonwealth of Nations Lists List of countries by English-speaking population List of countries where English is an official language   Countries and territories where English is the national language or the native language of the majority Africa Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Americas Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda The Bahamas Barbados Belize Bermuda British Virgin Islands Canada Cayman Islands Dominica Falkland Islands Grenada Guyana Jamaica Montserrat Saba Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Trinidad and Tobago Turks and Caicos Islands United States United States Virgin Islands Europe Guernsey Ireland Isle of Man Jersey United Kingdom Oceania Australia New Zealand Norfolk Island Pitcairn Islands   Countries and territories where English is an official language, but not the majority first language Africa Botswana Cameroon The Gambia Ghana Kenya Lesotho Liberia Malawi Mauritius Namibia Nigeria Rwanda Sierra Leone Somaliland South Africa South Sudan Sudan Swaziland Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Americas Puerto Rico Asia Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Special Administrative Region India Pakistan Philippines Singapore Europe Gibraltar Malta Oceania American Samoa Cook Islands Fiji Guam Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru Niue Northern Mariana Islands Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tokelau Tuvalu Vanuatu Dependencies shown in italics. Authority control GND: 4014777-0 SUDOC: 027219232 NDL: 00561788 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=English_language&oldid=777197756" Categories: Analytic languages English language English languages Fusional languages Germanic languages Languages of American Samoa Languages of Antigua and Barbuda Languages of Australia Languages of Belize Languages of Bermuda Languages of Botswana Languages of Cameroon Languages of Canada Languages of Fiji Languages of Ghana Languages of Grenada Languages of Guam Languages of Guyana Languages of Hong Kong Languages of India Languages of Ireland Languages of Jamaica Languages of Kenya Languages of Kiribati Languages of Lesotho Languages of Liberia Languages of Malawi Languages of Malaysia Languages of Malta Languages of Mauritius Languages of Namibia Languages of Nauru Languages of New Zealand Languages of Nigeria Languages of Niue Languages of Pakistan Languages of Palau Languages of Papua New Guinea Languages of Rwanda Languages of Saint Kitts and Nevis Languages of Saint Lucia Languages of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Languages of Samoa Languages of Seychelles Languages of Sierra Leone Languages of Singapore Languages of South Africa Languages of South Sudan Languages of Sudan Languages of Swaziland Languages of the Bahamas Languages of the British Virgin Islands Languages of the Cayman Islands Languages of the Marshall Islands Languages of the Philippines Languages of the Pitcairn Islands Languages of the Solomon Islands Languages of the United Kingdom Languages of the United States Virgin Islands Languages of the United States Languages of Tokelau Languages of Trinidad and Tobago Languages of Uganda Languages of Vanuatu Languages of Zambia Languages of Zimbabwe Stress-timed languages Subject–verb–object languages Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Good articles Use dmy dates from February 2016 EngvarB from July 2014 Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code ISO language articles citing sources other than Ethnologue Articles including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Old English-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016 Articles with hAudio microformats Pages containing links to subscription-or-libraries content Pages containing links to subscription-only content Pages with login required references or sources Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiquote Languages Acèh ???????? ???????? Afrikaans Akan Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés ????? Armãneashti Arpetan ??????? Asturianu Avañe'? ???? Aymar aru Az?rbaycanca ?????? Bamanankan ????? Bahasa Banjar Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ??????? Bikol Central ????????? Boarisch ??????? Bosanski Brezhoneg ?????? Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski Eesti ???????? Emiliàn e rumagnòl ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara E?egbe ????? Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ?? ????? ??????? ?????? ?????? ?????? / Gõychi Konknni ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hawai?i ??????? ?????? Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue ??????/inuktitut ???? IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kalaallisut ????? Kapampangan ????????-??????? ??????? ????? / ????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Kinyarwanda Kiswahili ???? Kongo Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî ???????? ????? ???? Ladino ????? ????? ??? ???? ?????? Latga?u Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Ligure Limburgs Lingála La .lojban. Lumbaart Magyar ?????? ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ????????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-d??ng-ng?? Mirandés ??????? ?????? ?????????? N?huatl Dorerin Naoero Nederlands Nedersaksies N?hiyaw?win / ??????? ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norfuk / Pitkern Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? Pälzisch Pangasinan ?????? Papiamentu ???? Patois ????? ???? ????????? Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Q?r?mtatarca Reo tahiti Ripoarisch Român? Rumantsch Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sámegiella Gagana Samoa ????????? Sängö Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sesotho Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana Shqip Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? SiSwati Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????????? / ?????????? ?l?nski Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Sranantongo ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Taqbaylit Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ?????? ??? ?????? ??? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe Twi ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? ???? ???????? / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Võro Walon ?? West-Vlams Winaray Wolof ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zazaki Zeêuws Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 25 April 2017, at 19:48. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Arts |||Portal:Arts From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Shortcuts: P:A P:ARTS Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Sociology portals: Arts · Anthropology · Community · Culture · Economics · Education · Geography · Gender studies · Globalization · History · Human rights · Internet · Law · Philosophy · Social movements · Social sciences · Social welfare and social work · Society edit   The Arts Portal Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts The arts is a vast subdivision of culture, composed of many creative endeavors and disciplines. It is a broader term than "art", which, as a description of a field, usually means only the visual arts. The arts encompass the visual arts, the literary arts and the performing arts – music, theatre, dance and film, among others. This list is by no means comprehensive, but only meant to introduce the concept of the arts. For all intents and purposes, the history of the arts begins with the history of art. The arts might have origins in early human evolutionary prehistory. Ancient Greek art saw the veneration of the animal form and the development of equivalent skills to show musculature, poise, beauty and anatomically correct proportions. Ancient Roman art depicted gods as idealized humans, shown with characteristic distinguishing features (e.g. Jupiter's thunderbolt). In Byzantine and Gothic art of the Middle Ages, the dominance of the church insisted on the expression of biblical and not material truths. Eastern art has generally worked in a style akin to Western medieval art, namely a concentration on surface patterning and local colour (meaning the plain colour of an object, such as basic red for a red robe, rather than the modulations of that colour brought about by light, shade and reflection). A characteristic of this style is that the local colour is often defined by an outline (a contemporary equivalent is the cartoon). This is evident in, for example, the art of India, Tibet and Japan. Religious Islamic art forbids iconography, and expresses religious ideas through geometry instead. The physical and rational certainties depicted by the 19th-century Enlightenment were shattered not only by new discoveries of relativity by Einstein and of unseen psychology by Freud, but also by unprecedented technological development. Paradoxically the expressions of new technologies were greatly influenced by the ancient tribal arts of Africa and Oceania, through the works of Paul Gauguin and the Post-Impressionists, Pablo Picasso and the Cubists, as well as the Futurists and others. More about The arts... View new selections below (purge) edit   Featured article Louis Lambert is a French novel by Honoré de Balzac (1799–1850), included in the Études philosophiques section of his novel sequence La Comédie humaine. Set mostly in a school at Vendôme, it examines the life and theories of a boy genius fascinated by the Swedish philosopher Emanuel Swedenborg (1688–1772). Balzac wrote Louis Lambert during the summer of 1832 while he was staying with friends at the Château de Saché. The novel contains a minimal plot, focusing mostly on the metaphysical ideas of its boy-genius protagonist and his only friend (eventually revealed to be Balzac himself). Although it is not a significant example of the realist style for which Balzac became famous, the novel provides insight into the author's own childhood. Specific details and events from the author's life – including punishment from teachers and social ostracism – suggest a fictionalized autobiography. Critics panned the novel, but Balzac believed that it provided an important look at philosophy, especially metaphysics. As he developed the scheme for La Comédie humaine, he placed Louis Lambert in the Études philosophiques section, and later returned to the same themes in his novel Séraphîta, about an androgynous angelic creature. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured picture Credit: Muhammad Mahdi Karim The glass house at Lal Bagh, a botanical garden in Bangalore, India. The garden was commissioned by the ruler of Mysore, Hyder Ali in 1760, and completed during the reign of his son Tipu Sultan. The glass house was modeled on London's Crystal Palace and constructed at the end of the 19th century. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Did you know... ... that The Fairman Rogers Four-in-Hand (pictured) was the first painting to demonstrate, based on systematic photographic analysis, how horses move? ... that Cheyenne artist Bently Spang satirized anthropologists' depictions of Native Americans as a "lost culture" with a museum exhibit showcasing ordinary objects? ... that Bagyi Aung Soe, now recognized as one of Burma's most important modern artists, lived in poverty and was considered by some to be mad? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   In this month 9 April 2000 – Jackie Evancho is born. At the age of 10, she becomes the youngest singer in history with a platinum album, O Holy Night. 10 April 1900 – Scottish soprano Mary Garden makes her professional debut singing the title role in Gustave Charpentier's Louise at the Opéra-Comique in Paris 11 April 1869 – Norwegian sculptor Gustav Vigeland, designer of the Nobel Peace Prize medal, is born near Halse og Harkmark 12 April 1937 – Abdülhak Hâmid Tarhan, an early 20th-century Turkish playwright and poet who was one of the leading lights of the Turkish Romantic period dies in Istanbul 23 April 1616 – William Shakespeare (pictured), often considered the greatest English playwright, dies in Stratford-upon-Avon at the age of 52 29 April 1968 – Hair, which defined the genre of the "rock musical", has its Broadway premiere at the Biltmore Theatre More anniversaries... edit   News April 5: Wikinews visits set of indie film 'Dead on Set' April 3: Pop-artist James Rosenquist dies aged 83 March 27: Fans unite at Toronto Comicon, meet Degrassi stars March 1: Politically concerned movie Zootopia wins Academy Award for Best Animated Feature Film February 15: Adele and David Bowie each win five Grammys Arts on Wikinews edit   Featured biography André Kertész (1894–1985) was a Hungarian-born photographer distinguished by his photographic composition and by his early efforts in developing the photo essay. In the early years of his lengthy career, his then-unorthodox camera angles, and his unwillingness to compromise his personal photographic style, prevented his work from gaining wider recognition. Even towards the end of his life, Kertész did not feel he had gained worldwide recognition. The first photographer to have an exposition devoted to his work, he is recognized as one of the seminal figures of photojournalism, if not photography as a whole. Dedicated by his family to work as a stock broker, Kertész was an autodidact and his early work was mostly published in magazines. The imminent threat of WWII pushed him to immigrate to the United States, where he had a more difficult life and needed to rebuild his reputation through commissioned work. He would take offense with several editors that he felt did not recognize his work. In the 1940s and '50s he stopped working for magazines and began to achieve greater international success. Despite the numerous awards he collected over the years, he still felt unrecognized, a sentiment which did not change even at the time of his death. His career is generally divided into four periods – the Hungarian period, the French period, the American period and, towards the end of his life, the International period. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured audio 1788 – Auld Lang Syne Frank C. Stanley's 1910 performance of Robert Burns' Auld Lang Syne. Contains the first and last verse. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories ? Arts ? Arts portal ? Arts by culture ? Arts by place ? Arts-related lists ? Aesthetics ? Arts genres by country or nationality ? Arts awards ? Censorship in the arts ? Crafts ? Creative works ? Arts districts ? Arts events ? Literature ? Arts occupations ? Arts organizations ? Arts portals ? Performing arts ? Religion and the arts ? Arts venues ? Visual arts ? Women and the arts ? Works about the arts ? Wikipedia books on arts ? Art stubs edit   WikiProjects Parent project Arts Descendant projects Aesthetics Architecture Books Novels Collections care Dance Films Horror Literature Magic Music Albums Classical music Composers Guitar Musicians Music Venues Opera Gilbert and Sullivan Richard Wagner Poetry Television Theatre Elizabethan theatre Musical theatre Visual arts Animation Anime and manga Contemporary art Comics Graffiti Graphic design Fashion Photography Public art What are WikiProjects? edit   Selected quote “ It [the movie art form] combines so many other art forms, as do theater and opera, but the essence of cinema is editing. It's the combination of what can be extraordinary images, images of people during emotional moments, or just images in a general sense, but put together in a kind of alchemy. A number of images put together a certain way become something quite above and beyond what any of them are individually. ” — Francis Ford Coppola ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Related portals Architecture Culture Dance Film Literature Music Philosophy Poetry Television Theatre Video games Visual arts Writing edit   Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Requests articles (arts and entertainment) Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Arts Expand: check Art stubs to expand Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Arts topics, requested pictures edit   Associated Wikimedia Arts on Wikibooks  Arts on Wikimedia Commons Arts on Wikinews  Arts on Wikiquote  Arts on Wikisource  Arts on Wikiversity  Arts on Wiktionary  Manuals and books Images and media News Quotations Texts Learning resources Definitions What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Arts&oldid=649230671" Categories: Arts portal Arts Visual arts Performing arts Arts portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Català ?eština Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español ????? Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kapampangan ??????? Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Malagasy ?????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? Nederlands ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ???? ????? ?????? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? ????? ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Svenska Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ?????? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? West-Vlams ?? Xitsonga ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 28 February 2015, at 14:19. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography |||Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology edit   The Biography Portal Cultural icon A biography is a detailed description or account of someone's life. More than a list of basic facts (education, work, relationships, and death), a biography also portrays a subject's experience of these events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of his or her life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of a subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Biographical works in diverse media—from literature to film—form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and, at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is about a life of a subject, written by that subject or sometimes with a collaborator. More about biographies… View new selections below (purge) edit   Featured biography Ahmose I (sometimes written Amosis I and meaning The Moon is Born) was a pharaoh of ancient Egypt and the founder of the Eighteenth dynasty. He was a member of the Theban royal house, the son of pharaoh Tao II Seqenenre and brother of the last pharaoh of the Seventeenth dynasty, King Kamose. Sometime during the reign of his father or grandfather, Thebes rebelled against the Hyksos, the rulers of Lower Egypt. When he was seven his father was killed, and when he was about ten his brother died of unknown causes, after reigning only three years. Ahmose I assumed the throne after the death of his brother, and upon coronation became known as Neb-Pehty-Re (The Lord of Strength is Re). During his reign he completed the conquest and expulsion of the Hyksos from the delta region, restored Theban rule over the whole of Egypt and successfully reasserted Egyptian power in its formerly subject territories of Nubia and Canaan. He then reorganized the administration of the country, reopened quarries, mines and trade routes and began massive construction projects of a type that had not been undertaken since the time of the Middle Kingdom. This building program culminated in the construction of the last pyramid built by native Egyptian rulers. Ahmose's reign laid the foundations for the New Kingdom, under which Egyptian power reached its peak. His reign is usually dated to about 1550–1525 BC. (Read more...) Archive – More "Featured biographies"... edit   Selected portrait Credit: Bain News Service, restored by jjron Lillian Diana Gish (October 14, 1893 – February 27, 1993) was an American stage, screen, and television actress, director and writer whose film acting career spanned 75 years, from 1912 to 1987. She was a prominent film star of the 1910s and 1920s, particularly associated with the films of director D. W. Griffith, including her leading role in Griffith's seminal Birth of a Nation. More selected pictures... Read more... edit   Things you can do Write an article Expand an article about: a person an actor an animator an artist a businessperson a diplomat an educator an engineer a jurist a military person a musician a politician a scientist a sportsperson a writer a photographer Improve an article by: adding references Review an article John Gilchrist (linguist) • Thomas Brattle • Answer requests for comments Assess an article Assessment requests Unassessed articles edit   Categories Biography • People By association • By behavior • By ethnicity • By gender • By language • By nationality By occupation: Academics • Scientists Actors • Artists • Choreographers • Comedians • Dancers • Directors • Musicians • Photographers • Playwrights • Writers Astronauts • Aviators • Explorers • Mountain climbers Businesspeople • Computer designers • Innovators Heads of state • Humanitarians • Journalists • Lawyers • Politicians • Warriors Sportspeople • Association football players • Baseball players • Basketball players • Olympians By place • By political orientation • By religion By status: Award winners • Billionaires • Celebrities By time • Lists of people ? Biography (genre) ? Biography awards ? Biographers ? Family history ? Biography journals ? Biographical museums ? Oral history ? Person databases ? The Biography Channel shows ? Biographical works edit   On this day – April 26 Births 121 - Marcus Aurelius, Roman Emperor (d. 180) 1711 - David Hume, Scottish philosopher and historian (d. 1776) (pictured) 1785 - John James Audubon, French-American naturalist and illustrator (d. 1851) 1917 - I.M. Pei, Chinese-born architect 1933 - Carol Burnett, American comedian Deaths 1865 - John Wilkes Booth, American actor and assassin (shot) (b. 1838) 1970 - Gypsy Rose Lee, American actress (b. 1911) 1989 - Lucille Ball, American actress and comedian (b. 1911) More of today's anniversaries... edit   Did you know ... that Madmen in the Yard, a drawing by the Croatian painter Ignjat Job (pictured), was influenced by his two-year stay in a mental hospital? ... that USMC Lieutenant General Henry Louis Larsen was Governor of American Samoa and Governor of Guam after his father-in-law and brother-in-law were each Governor of Colorado? ... that detailed drawings by French explorer Louis Delaporte guided the reconstruction of Pha That Luang, a major Buddhist temple in Laos? ... that although Norma Lyon studied animal science at Iowa State University, she ended up sculpting butter at state fairs? ... that Tom Paton, a member of the Montreal hockey club, was the first goaltender to win the Stanley Cup in 1893? ... that after the Ottoman general Turahano?lu Ömer Bey wiped out one of Dracula's armies in 1462, he deposited 2,000 severed heads at the feet of Sultan Mehmed II? ... that the hasty marriage of Thomas Thynne of Longleat may have helped to inspire Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet? Read more... edit   Quote of the week "There is no Death! What seems so is transition; This life of mortal breath Is but a suburb of the life elysian, Whose portal we call Death." — Henry Wadsworth Longfellow In Resignation, 1849 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit   WikiProjects List of WikiProjects and work groups that involve biography articles: Arts and entertainment Actors and Filmmakers Composers Canadian Dictionary of Biography Initiative Living persons Philosophers Saints Romance authors Military Peers and Baronets Politics and government U.S. Members of Congress U.S. presidents Royalty and nobility Science and academia Aerospace Sports and games Baseball players List of all WikiProjects See also: Biographies of living persons • Manual of Style (biographies) edit   Related portals Anthropology Community Criminal justice Culture Death Gangs Human rights LGBT Mind and brain Music Philosophy Religion Sexuality Social and political philosophy Thinking edit   Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Wikispecies  Species Wikipedia's Portals All Portals Overview Glossaries Indices Lists Outlines Categories Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Featured portals About portals Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=771163531" Categories: Depreciated Portal:Biography pages Biography portal Biography portals Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ?????? ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 19 March 2017, at 22:49. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Geography |||Portal:Geography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Sociology portals: Arts · Anthropology · Community · Culture · Economics · Education · Geography · Gender studies · Globalization · History · Human rights · Internet · Law · Philosophy · Social movements · Social sciences · Social welfare and social work · Society Places near you edit   The Geography Portal Transportation geography Geography is the science that studies the lands, the features, the inhabitants, and the phenomena of the Earth. A literal translation would be "to describe or write about the Earth". The first person to use the word "geography" was Eratosthenes (276–194 BC). Four historical traditions in geographical research are the spatial analysis of the natural and the human phenomena (geography as the study of distribution), the area studies (places and regions), the study of the human-land relationship, and research in the Earth sciences. Modern geography is an all-encompassing discipline that foremost seeks to understand the Earth and all of its human and natural complexities—not merely where objects are, but how they have changed and come to be. Geography has been called "the world discipline" and "the bridge between the human and the physical science". Geography is divided into two main branches: human geography and physical geography. More about geography… View new selections below (purge) edit   Featured article Karnataka is a state in South West India. It was created on 1 November 1956 with the passage of the States Reorganisation Act, and this day is annually celebrated as Karnataka Rajyotsava (Formation Day). Originally known as the State of Mysore, it was renamed Karnataka in 1973. It is the land of the Kannadiga, Tuluva, Konkani, and Kodava peoples. With over 61 million inhabitants as of 2011, Karnataka is the ninth largest state by population in India. Kannada is the most widely spoken and official language of the state. The two main river systems of the state are Krishna and its tributaries (Bhima, Ghataprabha, Vedavati, Malaprabha, and Tungabhadra) in the north, and the Cauvery and its tributaries (Hemavati, Shimsha, Arkavathi, Lakshmana Thirtha and Kabini) in the south. Both these rivers flow eastward and fall into the Bay of Bengal. With an antiquity that dates to the paleolithic, Karnataka has also been home to some of the most powerful empires of ancient and medieval India. The philosophers and musical bards patronised by these empires launched socio-religious and literary movements which have endured to the present day. Karnataka has contributed significantly to both the Carnatic and Hindustani forms of Indian classical music. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   In this month 7 April 1985 – Premiere of National Geographic Explorer on Nickelodeon 10 April 1982 – Arrival of Ranulph Fiennes and Charles R. Burton at North Pole 13 April 2005 – Launch of Genographic Project by National Geographic Society and IBM 27 April 1521 – Death of Ferdinand Magellan (pictured), Portuguese explorer who led part of the first expedition around the world More anniversaries... edit   Did you know... ...that the megalithic Niedertiefenbach tomb in Hesse (pictured), Germany has at least ten discernible layers of burials from the New Stone Age? ... that Broad Avenue in Memphis, Tennessee, went from vacant storefronts to a vibrant arts district in less than a decade? ... that forest degradation and illegal exports threaten the survival of the Rainforest Chameleon? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Things you can do Here are some tasks awaiting attention: Article requests?: See Requested articles/Social sciences/Geography, cities, regions and named places and Missing articles about Locations Assess?: Tag related article talk pages with {{WikiProject Geography}}. To help assess the quality and importance of geography articles, please see: Unassessed geography articles and Unknown-importance geography articles. Cleanup?: See Geography articles needing attention Geography Geographic information system Geography of China Geostatistics History of geography Holarctic Kriging Philosophy of geography Urbanism Valley Copyedit?: Geographical feature Glossary of geography terms List of world map changes Regions of North America (See Regions of Africa) Regions of Oceania Regions of South America Demographics of Asia (See Demographics of Africa) Demographics of Oceania Cycle of erosion Outer Continental Shelf Tied island Deletion sorting?: Listed at Geographic related deletion discussions Expand?: TOP PRIORITY: expand articles in Outline of geography and Outlines of regions (one for each country and region) - these are general reference companions to the main articles on each country. Are your favorite countries covered yet? The lists completed enough to be transferred to article space can be found at Portal:Contents/Geography and places. Index of geography articles (replace redirect with an article index, see Index of psychology articles as an example) List of geographers Visual geography Geographical coordinates?: See Articles missing geocoordinate data by country Infobox?: See Geography articles needing infoboxes Map?: See Wikipedia requested maps Notability?: See Geography articles with topics of unclear notability Photo?: See Wikipedia requested photographs of places Stubs?: See Geography stubs edit   Featured biography Mary Anning was a British fossil collector, dealer and palaeontologist who became known around the world for important finds she made in the Jurassic marine fossil beds at Lyme Regis where she lived. Her work contributed to fundamental changes in scientific thinking about prehistoric life and the history of the earth. Her discoveries included the first ichthyosaur skeleton to be correctly identified, found when she was just twelve years old; the first two plesiosaur skeletons ever found; the first pterosaur skeleton located outside Germany; and important fish fossils. Her observations were critical to the discovery that coprolites were fossilised faeces. Geologist Henry De la Beche's Duria Antiquior, the first widely circulated pictorial representation of a scene from prehistoric life derived from fossil reconstructions, was based largely on fossils Anning had found. Her gender and social class prevented her from fully participating in the scientific community of 19th-century Britain, prevented her from joining the Geological Society of London, and prevented her from getting full credit for her work during her lifetime. After her death her unusual life story attracted increasing interest. In 2010 the Royal Society included Anning in a list of the ten British women who have most influenced the history of science. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories ? Geography ? Geography by place ? Geography-related lists ? Geography awards and competitions ? Branches of geography ? Geographic classifications ? Geography conferences ? Geography education ? Environmental studies ? Exploration ? Geocodes ? Geographers ? Geographic data and information ? Geographical zones ? History of geography ? Land systems ? Landscape ? Lists of countries by geography ? Navigation ? Geography organizations ? Places ? Geographical regions ? Surveying ? Geographical technology ? Geography terminology ? Town squares ? Works about geography ? Geographic images ? Geography stubs edit   WikiProjects Parent project WikiProject Geography Descendant projects Caves Cities Countries Country subdivisions Demographics Deserts Former countries Geographical coordinates Glaciers Islands Lakes Maps Mountains Protected areas Rivers Subdivisions of former countries Tropical cyclones Urban studies and planning Volcanoes Waterfalls Related projects WikiProject Globalization What are WikiProjects? edit   Featured picture Credit: Ikiwaner Dead Acacia erioloba trees in Deadvlei, a white claypan inside Namib-Naukluft Park in the Namib Desert of Namibia. Deadvlei is surrounded by the highest sand dunes in the world, averaging 350 metres (1,150 ft) high. About 900 years ago, drought caused the dunes to block the Tsauchab river, which in turn killed the trees. However, because the desert is so dry, they do not decompose. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Selected quote “ Roll on, thou deep and dark blue Ocean—roll! / Ten thousand fleets sweep over thee in vain; / Man marks the earth with ruin—his control / Stops with the shore. ” — Lord Byron, Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, Canto IV (1818) ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Articles Antarctica Afro-Eurasia Americas Australia Africa Eurasia North America Oceania Europe Asia South America Supercontinents: Gondwana • Laurasia • Pangaea • Rodinia edit   Subportals Africa Antarctica Arctic Asia Caribbean Central America Europe European Union Islands Latin America Mediterranean Middle East North America Oceania Oceans South America edit   Related portals Atlas Atmosphere Atmospheric sciences Disasters Earth sciences Earthquakes Energy Environment Global warming Islands Mountains Physics Political science Science Seamounts Sociology Sustainable development Tropical cyclones Volcanoes Water Weather edit   Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Wikispecies  Species What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Geography&oldid=709404983" Categories: Geography Geography portals Geography portal Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Bosanski Català Cebuano ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Dansk Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk Gagauz ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? ????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? N?huatl Nederlands ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ???? ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? Scots Seeltersk Shqip ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ????? Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Vèneto Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 10 March 2016, at 18:53. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:History |||Portal:History From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology  History Ancient Egypt Ancient Germanic Culture Ancient Greece Ancient Japan Ancient Near East Ancient Rome Anglo-Saxon England Archaeology Austria-Hungary  British Empire Bulgarian Empire Byzantine Empire Classical civilisation Colonialism Crusades Dacia Disasters German Empire Heraldry History of Canada  History of science Imperial China Indian independence movement Khitan Latter Day Saint movement Middle Ages Mughal Empire New France Ottoman Empire Russian Empire Sasanian Empire Seljuk Empire Soviet Union  War edit   The History Portal This is the Place Monument History is the discovery, collection, organization, analysis, and presentation of information about past events. History can also mean a continuous, typically chronological record of important or public events or of a particular trend or institution. Scholars who write about history are called historians. It is a field of knowledge which uses a narrative to examine and analyse the sequence of events, and it sometimes attempts to objectively investigate the patterns of cause and effect that determine events. Historians debate the nature of history and its usefulness. This includes discussing the study of the discipline as an end in itself and as a way of providing "perspective" on the problems of the present. The stories common to a particular culture but not supported by external sources (such as the legends surrounding King Arthur) are usually classified as cultural heritage rather than as the "disinterested investigation" needed by the discipline of history. Events of the past prior to written record are considered prehistory. Amongst scholars, fifth century BC Greek historian Herodotus is considered to be the "father of history"; the methods of Herodotus along with his contemporary Thucydides form the foundations for the modern study of history. Their influence (along with other historical traditions in other parts of their world) has spawned many different interpretations of the nature of history which has developed over the centuries and are continuing to change. The modern study of history has many different fields, including those that focus on certain regions and those that focus on certain topical or thematic elements of historical investigation. Often, history is taught as part of primary and secondary education, and the academic study of history is a major discipline in university studies. More about History… View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article The formal unification of Germany into a politically and administratively integrated nation state officially occurred on 18 January 1871 at the Versailles Palace's Hall of Mirrors in France. Princes of the German states gathered there to proclaim Wilhelm of Prussia as Emperor Wilhelm of the German Empire after the French capitulation in the Franco-Prussian War. Unofficially, the transition of most of the German-speaking populations into a federated organization of states occurred over nearly a century of experimentation. Unification exposed several glaring religious, linguistic, social, and cultural differences between and among the inhabitants of the new nation, suggesting that 1871 only represents one moment in a continuum of the larger unification processes. The model of diplomatic spheres of influence resulting from the Congress of Vienna in 1814–15 after the Napoleonic Wars endorsed Austrian dominance in Central Europe. However, the negotiators at Vienna took no account of Prussia's growing strength within and among the German states, failing to foresee that Prussia would challenge Austria for leadership within the German states. This German dualism presented two solutions to the problem of unification: Kleindeutsche Lösung, the small Germany solution (Germany without Austria), or Großdeutsche Lösung, greater Germany solution (Germany with Austria). Reaction to Danish and French nationalism provided foci for expressions of German unity. Military successes—especially Prussian ones—in three regional wars generated enthusiasm and pride that politicians could harness to promote unification. This experience echoed the memory of mutual accomplishment in the Napoleonic Wars, particularly in the War of Liberation of 1813–14. By establishing a Germany without Austria, the political and administrative unification in 1871 at least temporarily solved the problem of dualism. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Selected biography Pericles (Greek: ????????, Perikl?s, "surrounded by glory"; c. 495 – 429 BC) was a prominent and influential statesman, orator, and general of Athens during the city's Golden Age—specifically, the time between the Persian and Peloponnesian wars. He was descended, through his mother, from the powerful and historically influential Alcmaeonid family. Pericles had such a profound influence on Athenian society that Thucydides, his contemporary historian, acclaimed him as "the first citizen of Athens". Pericles turned the Delian League into an Athenian empire and led his countrymen during the first two years of the Peloponnesian War. The period during which he led Athens, roughly from 461 to 429 BC, is sometimes known as the "Age of Pericles", though the period thus denoted can include times as early as the Persian Wars, or as late as the next century. Pericles promoted the arts and literature; this was a chief reason Athens holds the reputation of being the educational and cultural centre of the ancient Greek world. He started an ambitious project that generated most of the surviving structures on the Acropolis (including the Parthenon). This project beautified the city, exhibited its glory, and gave work to the people. Furthermore, Pericles fostered Athenian democracy to such an extent that critics call him a populist. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Did you know... ... that on 26 April 1881 HMS Doterel (pictured) exploded, killing 143 of the 155 crew members? ... that causes of the deaths at the Berlin Wall included shooting, drowning, suffocation, suicide, and falling from a balloon? ... that the 19th-century swindler Bertha Heyman, known as "The Confidence Queen," conned men by pretending to be a wealthy woman who was unable to access her fortune? ... that only four great uncial codices have survived until the present day? ... that after World War II, Polish resistance organizer and Warsaw Uprising fighter Jan Mazurkiewicz was brutally tortured by the authorities in communist Poland? ... that tiny Paederus beetles may have caused some of the ten Plagues of Egypt? ... that the only known report of bloodshed during the simulated Nazi invasion of Winnipeg was from a woman who cut her thumb while preparing toast? ... that Dacian bracelets were used as currency and votive offerings? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Selected picture The Trinity nuclear test was the first nuclear detonation in the world. Conducted by the United States Army on July 16, 1945, the successful test would set the stage for the coming Atomic Age. This image, captured by Berlyn Brixner, shows the fireball that developed 0.016 seconds after ignition; the explosive had a yield of 20 kilotons of dynamite. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   On this day April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries edit   Selected quote Victorious warriors win first and then go to war, while defeated warriors go to war first and then seek to win. —?Sun Tzu, Ancient Chinese military strategist ...Archive More... edit   Selected portal Classical civilisation "The ideas which now pass for brilliant innovations and advances are in fact mere revivals of ancient errors, and a further proof of the dictum that those who are ignorant of the past are condemned to repeat it." — Henry Hazlitt ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Things you can do    Here are some Open Tasks : Copy/edit: Hongwu Emperor, Indian independence movement, Modern history, More... Wikify: Merge: More... Requests: , More... Stubs: Panhellenic Liberation Movement, More... Requested pictures - of history topics Are you a historian, i.e. one who studies and writes history, and who has a keen interest in writing outstanding articles? Join our fine group by adding Category:Wikipedian historians to the bottom of your user page. edit   WikiProjects History Ancient Near East • Australian History • Classical Greece and Rome • Dacia • Former countries • History of Canada • Chinese history • European history • Heraldry and vexillology • Indian history • Jewish history • Medieval Scotland • Mesoamerica • Military history • Middle Ages • History of Science Time Days of the Year • Years Biography Composers • Political figures • Saints • United States Presidents   Topics v t e Social sciences Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural linguistics social Economics microeconomics macroeconomics Geography human integrative History cultural economic political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems Political science international relations psephology public administration public policy Psychology abnormal biological cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental (social science studies) Food studies Gender studies Global studies History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Media studies Philosophy of science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Social work Other categorizations Humanities Geisteswissenschaft Human science Index Journals Outline Wikiversity v t e Humanities Anthropology Digital Humanities History Law Literature Performing arts Politics Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts v t e Time Key concepts Human Life Nature Past history deep time Present Future Futures studies Far future in religion Far future in science fiction and popular culture Timeline of the far future Eternity Eternity of the world Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC UT TAI Unit of time Planck time Second Minute Hour Day Week Month Year Decade Century Millennium Tropical year Sidereal year Measurement systems Time zone 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Daylight saving time Solar time Sidereal time Metric time Decimal time Hexadecimal time Calendars Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Lunar Solar Hijri Mayan Intercalation Leap second Leap year Clocks Horology History of timekeeping devices Main types astrarium atomic quantum marine sundial sundial markup schema watch water-based Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Chronicle Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Religion Mythology Dreamtime K?la Kalachakra Prophecy Time and fate deities Wheel of time Immortality Philosophy of time A-series and B-series B-theory of time Causality Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Human experience and use of time Accounting period Chronemics Fiscal year Generation time Mental chronometry Music Procrastination Punctuality Temporal database Term Time discipline Time management Time perception Specious present Time-tracking software Time-use research Time-based currency (time banking) Time value of money Time clock Timesheet Yesterday Time in Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute time and space Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Imaginary time Planck epoch Planck time Proper time Rate Spacetime Theory of relativity Time dilation gravitational Time domain T-symmetry other subject areas Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Dating methodologies in archaeology Time geography Related topics Carpe diem Clock position Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time complexity Time signature Time travel Time portal v t e Chronology Key topics Archaeology Astronomy Geology History Human Life Nature Paleontology Time Eras Epochs Calendar eras Human Era Ab urbe condita Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Mundi Byzantine era Seleucid era Spanish era Before Present Hijri Egyptian Sothic cycle Hindu units of time (Yuga) Mesoamerican Long Count Short Count Tzolk'in Haab' Regnal year Canon of Kings Lists of kings Limmu Era names Chinese Japanese Korean Vietnamese Calendars Pre-Julian / Julian Pre-Julian Roman Original Julian Proleptic Julian Revised Julian Gregorian Gregorian Proleptic Gregorian Old Style and New Style dates Adoption of the Gregorian calendar Dual dating Astronomical Lunisolar Solar Lunar Astronomical year numbering Others Chinese sexagenary cycle Geologic Calendar Hebrew Iranian Islamic ISO week date Mesoamerican Maya Aztec Winter count (Plains Indians) Astronomic time Cosmic Calendar Ephemeris Galactic year Metonic cycle Milankovitch cycles Geologic time Concepts Deep time Geological history of Earth Geological time units Standards Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA) Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) Methods Chronostratigraphy Geochronology Isotope geochemistry Law of superposition Luminescence dating Samarium-neodymium dating Chronological dating Absolute dating Amino acid racemisation Archaeomagnetic dating Dendrochronology Ice core Incremental dating Lichenometry Paleomagnetism Radiometric dating Radiocarbon Uranium–lead Potassium-argon Tephrochronology Luminescence dating Relative dating Fluorine absorption Nitrogen dating Obsidian hydration Seriation Stratigraphy Genetic methods Molecular clock Linguistic methods Glottochronology Related topics Chronicle New Chronology Periodization Synchronoptic view Timeline Year Zero Circa Floruit Terminus post quem ASPRO chronology Portal edit   Categories History • By period • By region • By topic • By ethnic group • Historiography • Archaeology • Books • Documents • Maps • Images • Magazines • Organizations • Fictional • Museums • Pseudohistory • Stubs • Timelines • Chronology • People • Wikipedia historians ? History ? History by ethnic group ? History by location ? History by period ? History by topic ? Fields of history ? Historians ? History-related lists ? History awards ? Bible history ? Chronology ? Historical controversies ? Economic, social and political strategies ? History education ? Historical eras ? Events ? Historically themed events ? Historical geography ? Historicity ? Historiography ? Legacies ? Media history ? Historical objects ? Oral history ? History organizations ? Phaleristics ? Philosophy of history ? Historic preservation ? Pseudohistory ? Sacred history ? Theories of history ? Historical timelines ? Works about history ? World history ? Wikipedia books on history ? History images ? History stubs   Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Wikispecies  Species What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:History&oldid=749756545" Categories: History portal History portals History Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikisource Wikiversity Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ??????? ?????? ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Euskara ????? Français Frysk Gagauz Galego G?k?y? ??? ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? ?????? ????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? Nederlands ??? Napulitano ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ?????? ???? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? West-Vlams Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 16 November 2016, at 00:57. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Mathematics |||Portal:Mathematics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology edit   The Mathematics Portal Square root Mathematics is the study of numbers, quantity, space, structure, and change. Mathematics is used throughout the world as an essential tool in many fields, including natural science, engineering, medicine, and the social sciences. Applied mathematics, the branch of mathematics concerned with application of mathematical knowledge to other fields, inspires and makes use of new mathematical discoveries and sometimes leads to the development of entirely new mathematical disciplines, such as statistics and game theory. Mathematicians also engage in pure mathematics, or mathematics for its own sake, without having any application in mind. There is no clear line separating pure and applied mathematics, and practical applications for what began as pure mathematics are often discovered. More about Mathematics... Selected article | Selected picture | Did you know... | Topics in mathematics Categories | WikiProjects | Things you can do | Index | Related portals There are approximately 31,444 mathematics articles in Wikipedia. View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article Carl Friedrich Gauss Image credit: C.A. Jensen (1792-1870) Carl Friedrich Gauss (30 April 1777 – 23 February 1855) was a German mathematician and scientist of profound genius who contributed significantly to many fields, including number theory, analysis, differential geometry, geodesy, electricity, magnetism, astronomy and optics. Known as "the prince of mathematicians" and "greatest mathematician since antiquity", Gauss had a remarkable influence in many fields of mathematics and science and is ranked as one of history's most influential mathematicians. Gauss was a child prodigy, of whom there are many anecdotes pertaining to his astounding precocity while a mere toddler, and made his first ground-breaking mathematical discoveries while still a teenager. He completed Disquisitiones Arithmeticae, his magnum opus, at the age of twenty-one (1798), though it wasn't published until 1801. This work was fundamental in consolidating number theory as a discipline and has shaped the field to the present day. View all selected articles Read More... edit   Selected picture Credit: BenFrantzDale A Lorenz curve shows the distribution of income in a population by plotting the percentage y of total income that is earned by the bottom x percent of households (or individuals). Developed by economist Max O. Lorenz in 1905 to describe income inequality, the curve is typically plotted with a diagonal line (reflecting a hypothetical "equal" distribution of incomes) for comparison. This leads naturally to a derived quantity called the Gini coefficient, first published in 1912 by Corrado Gini, which is the ratio of the area between the diagonal line and the curve (area A in this graph) to the area under the diagonal line (the sum of A and B); higher Gini coefficients reflect more income inequality. Lorenz's curve is a special kind of cumulative distribution function used to characterize quantities that follow a Pareto distribution, a type of power law. More specifically, it can be used to illustrate the Pareto principle, a rule of thumb stating that roughly 80% of the identified "effects" in a given phenomenon under study will come from 20% of the "causes" (in the first decade of the 20th century Vilfredo Pareto showed that 80% of the land in Italy was owned by 20% of the population). As this so-called "80–20 rule" implies a specific level of inequality (i.e., a specific power law), more or less extreme cases are possible. For example, in the United States in the first half of the 2010s, 95% of the financial wealth was held by the top 20% of wealthiest households (in 2010), the top 1% of individuals held approximately 40% of the wealth (2012), and the top 1% of income earners received approximately 20% of the pre-tax income (2013). Observations such as these have brought income and wealth inequality into popular consciousness and have given rise to various slogans about "the 1%" versus "the 99%". More selected pictures... Read more... edit   Did you know... ... that economists blame market failures on non-convexity? ... that, according to the pizza theorem, a circular pizza that is sliced off-center into eight equal-angled wedges can still be divided equally between two people? ... that the clique problem of programming a computer to find complete subgraphs in an undirected graph was first studied as a way to find groups of people who all know each other in social networks? ... that the Herschel graph is the smallest possible polyhedral graph that does not have a Hamiltonian cycle? ... that the Life without Death cellular automaton, a mathematical model of pattern formation, is a variant of Conway's Game of Life in which cells, once brought to life, never die? ... that one can list every positive rational number without repetition by breadth-first traversal of the Calkin–Wilf tree? ... that the Hadwiger conjecture implies that the external surface of any three-dimensional convex body can be illuminated by only eight light sources, but the best proven bound is that 16 lights are sufficient?                           Showing 7 items out of 72 More did you know edit   WikiProjects The Mathematics WikiProject is the center for mathematics-related editing on Wikipedia. Join the discussion on the project's talk page. Project pages Participants Current activity Manual of style Conventions Essays Advice on using Wikipedia for mathematics self-study Proofs Subprojects PlanetMath Exchange (Talk) Graphics (Talk) Article assessment (Talk) Related projects Computer science | Cryptography | Game theory | Numbers | Physics | Science | Statistics edit   Things you can do Create a new article: See requested articles list Add a new image: Requested images list Improve articles: Pages needing attention (Category) Expand articles: Mathematics stubs edit   Categories Algebra | Arithmetic | Analysis | Complex analysis | Applied mathematics | Calculus | Category theory | Chaos theory | Combinatorics | Dynamic systems | Fractals | Game theory | Geometry | Algebraic geometry | Graph theory | Group theory | Linear algebra | Mathematical logic | Model theory | Multi-dimensional geometry | Number theory | Numerical analysis | Optimization | Order theory | Probability and statistics | Set theory | Statistics | Topology | Algebraic topology | Trigonometry | Linear programming Mathematics (books) | History of mathematics | Mathematicians | Awards | Education | Literature | Notation | Organizations | Theorems | Proofs | Unsolved problems ? Mathematics ? Fields of mathematics ? Mathematics-related lists ? Mathematicians ? Mathematical concepts ? Mathematics and culture ? Mathematical examples ? History of mathematics ? Mathematics and art ? Mathematical modeling ? Mathematical notation ? Mathematical science occupations ? Philosophy of mathematics ? Mathematical projects ? Mathematical proofs ? Pseudomathematics ? Set indices on mathematics ? Mathematical terminology ? Mathematics textbooks ? Mathematical theorems ? Mathematical tools ? Women in mathematics ? Wikipedia books on mathematics ? Mathematics stubs More mathematics categories edit   Topics in mathematics General Foundations Number theory Discrete mathematics Mathematicians History of mathematics Philosophy of mathematics Mathematical notation Mathematical beauty Mathematics education Areas of mathematics List of basic mathematics topics List of mathematical symbols Wikipedia Books: Mathematics Foundations of mathematics Mathematical logic Proof theory Gödel's incompleteness theorems Model theory Recursion theory Set theory (portal) Naive set theory Axiomatic set theory Category theory (portal) Topos theory Number theory (portal) Algebraic number theory Analytic number theory Arithmetic Fundamental theorem of arithmetic Numbers Natural numbers Prime numbers Rational numbers Algebraic numbers Discrete mathematics (portal) Combinatorics Combinatorial geometry Coding theory Combinatorial design Enumerative combinatorics Combinatorial optimization Graph theory Order theory Lattice theory Algebra Analysis Geometry and topology Applied mathematics Algebra (portal) Elementary algebra Abstract algebra Group theory Ring theory Field theory Commutative algebra Geometric algebra Linear algebra Matrix theory Multilinear algebra Universal algebra Fundamental theorem of algebra Analysis (portal) Calculus Fundamental theorem of calculus Vector calculus Geometric calculus Measure theory Real analysis Complex analysis Differential equations Ordinary differential equations Partial differential equations Integral equations Approximation theory Special functions Potential theory Harmonic analysis Fourier analysis Functional analysis Operator theory Geometry (portal) Euclidean geometry Trigonometry Analytic geometry Non-Euclidean geometry Affine geometry Projective geometry Convex geometry Discrete geometry Algebraic geometry Differential geometry Riemannian geometry Lie groups Topology (portal) General topology Algebraic topology Geometric topology Differential topology Applied mathematics Mathematical modeling Mathematical physics Dynamical systems Control theory Calculus of variations Optimization Mathematical economics Game theory Mathematical finance Statistics (portal) Probability theory Stochastic processes Numerical analysis Theoretical computer science Computability theory Complexity theory Cryptography (portal) Information theory edit   Index of mathematics articles ARTICLE INDEX: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z (0–9) MATHEMATICIANS: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z edit   Related portals Algebra Analysis Category theory Computer science Cryptography Discrete mathematics Geometry Logic Mathematics Number theory Physics Science Set theory Statistics Topology Science History of science    Philosophy of science    Systems science    Mathematics    Biology    Chemistry    Physics    Earth sciences    Technology    What are portals? List of portals edit   In other Wikimedia projects The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Mathematics&oldid=686628022" Categories: Mathematics portal Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikinews Wikisource Wikiversity Languages ???? ??????? ???? ????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français G?k?y? ??? ??????? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Lietuvi? Lumbaart Magyar ?????????? Malti Bahasa Melayu ?????????? Nederlands ??? O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? Shqip ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Suomi Svenska ????? Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 20 October 2015, at 08:24. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Science |||Portal:Science From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Science History of science    Philosophy of science    Systems science    Mathematics    Biology    Chemistry    Physics    Earth sciences    Technology    Main page   Categories & Main topics   Related portals & WikiProjects   Things you can do edit The Science Portal For a topic outline of science, see Outline of science. Meissner effect Science is the methodical study of nature including testable explanations and predictions. From classical antiquity through the 19th century, science as a type of knowledge was more closely linked to philosophy than it is now and, in fact, in the Western world, the term "natural philosophy" encompassed fields of study that are today associated with science, such as astronomy, medicine, and physics. However, during the Islamic Golden Age foundations for the scientific method were laid by Ibn al-Haytham in his Book of Optics. While the classification of the material world by the ancient Indians and Greeks into air, earth, fire and water was more philosophical, medieval Middle Easterns used practical, experimental observation to classify materials. Today, the ever-evolving term "science" refers to the pursuit of knowledge, not the knowledge itself. It is often synonymous with "natural and physical science" and often restricted to those branches of study relating to the phenomena of the material universe and their laws. Although the term implies exclusion of pure mathematics, many university faculties include Mathematics Departments within their Faculty of Science. The dominant sense in ordinary use has a narrower use for the term "science." It developed as a part of science becoming a distinct enterprise of defining the "laws of nature"; early examples include Kepler's laws, Galileo's laws, and Newton's laws of motion. In this period it became more common to refer to natural philosophy as "natural science." Over the course of the 19th century, the word "science" became increasingly associated with the disciplined study of the natural world, including physics, chemistry, geology and biology. This sometimes left the study of human thought and society in a linguistic limbo, which was resolved by classifying these areas of academic study as social science. For example, psychology evolved from philosophy, and has grown into an area of study. Currently, there are both "hard" (e.g. biological psychology) and "soft" science (e.g. social psychology) fields within the discipline. As a result, and as is consistent with the unfolding of the study of knowledge and development of methods to establish facts, each area of psychology employs a scientific method. Reflecting the evolution of the development of knowledge and established facts and the use of the scientific method, Psychology Departments in universities are found within: Faculty of Arts and Science, Faculty of Arts, and a Faculty of Science. Similarly, several other major areas of disciplined study and knowledge exist today under the general rubric of "science", such as formal science and applied science. More about Science... View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article A space elevator is a hypothetical structure designed to transport material from a planet's surface into space. Many different types of space elevator structures have been proposed. They all share the goal of replacing rocket propulsion with the traversal of a fixed structure via a mechanism not unlike an elevator, hence its name, in order to move material into or beyond orbit. Space elevators have also sometimes been referred to as space bridges, beanstalks, space ladders or space lifts. The most common proposal is a tether (usually a cable or ribbon) that spans from the surface to a point beyond geosynchronous orbit. As the planet rotates, the inertia at the end of the tether counteracts gravity and keeps the tether taut. Vehicles can then climb the tether and escape the planet's gravity without the use of rockets. Such a structure could eventually permit delivery of great quantities of cargo and people to orbit, and at costs only a fraction of those associated with current means. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Selected picture Credit: Earth Sciences and Image Analysis Laboratory, NASA View of the Earth as seen by the Apollo 17 crew traveling toward the moon. This translunar coast photograph extends from the Mediterranean Sea area to the Antarctica south polar ice cap. This is toward the northeast. Earth, also known as Terra, and (mostly in the 19th century) Tellus, is the third-closest planet to the Sun. It is the largest of the solar system's terrestrial planets and the only planetary body that modern science confirms as harboring life. Scientific evidence indicates that the planet formed around 4.57 billion years ago, and shortly thereafter (4.533 billion years ago) acquired its single natural satellite, the Moon. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Selected biography Carl Edward Sagan (November 9, 1934 – December 20, 1996) was an American astronomer, astrobiologist, and highly successful science popularizer. He pioneered exobiology and promoted the Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence (SETI). He is world-famous for writing popular science books and for co-writing and presenting the award-winning 1980 television series Cosmos: A Personal Voyage, which was the most-watched PBS program until Ken Burns' The Civil War in 1990. A book to accompany the program was also published. He also wrote the novel Contact, the basis for the 1997 film of the same name starring Jodie Foster. During his lifetime, Sagan published more than 600 scientific papers and popular articles and was author, co-author, or editor of more than 20 books. In his works, he frequently advocated scientific skepticism, humanism, and the scientific method. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Did you know... ...that the endangered golden lion tamarin (pictured) has a long, but not prehensile, tail? ...that the Witch's hat is the common name of a colourful orange-red toadstool? ...that Grandi's series 1 ? 1 + 1 ? 1 + • • • is divergent and appears to equal 0, yet in some sense "sums" to 1?2 — a paradox once linked to the creation ex nihilo of the universe? ...that Derek Freeman was an anthropologist whose refutation of Margaret Mead's work "ignited controversy of a scale, visibility, and ferocity never before seen in anthropology"? ...that the New Year's Eve snowstorm of 1963/1964 dropped over 17 inches of snow at Huntsville, Alabama, simultaneously setting new snowfall records for any day, week, or month in their history? ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Associated Wikimedia Science portal on Wikinews     Science on Wikiquote     Science subject on Wikibooks     Science portal on Wikisource     Science category on Wikicommons     Science category on Wiktionary     Wikiversity School of Science News Quotations Manuals Texts Images Definitions Learning Wikipedia's Portals All Portals Overview Glossaries Indices Lists Outlines Categories Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Featured portals About portals Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Science&oldid=714543061" Categories: Science portal Science Science portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikinews Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Català Cebuano Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Limburgs ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ????? Oromoo O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ?????? Português Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ??????? Seeltersk Setswana ????? ???? Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ?????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? ?? Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?????? ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 10 April 2016, at 11:29. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Society |||Portal:Society From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Sociology portals: Arts · Anthropology · Community · Culture · Economics · Education · Geography · Gender studies · Globalization · History · Human rights · Internet · Law · Philosophy · Social movements · Social sciences · Social welfare and social work · Society edit   The Society Portal Social network analysis diagram A human society is a group of people related to each other through continued relations, or a large social grouping sharing the same geographical or virtual territory, same interests, subject to the same political authority and dominant cultural expectations. Human societies are characterized by patterns of relationships (social relations) between individuals who share a distinctive culture and institutions. A given society may be described as the sum total of such relationships among its constituent members. In the social sciences, a larger society often evinces stratification and/or dominance patterns in subgroups. In so far as it is collaborative, a society can enable its members to benefit in ways that would not otherwise be possible on an individual basis; both individual and social (common) benefits can thus be distinguished, or in many cases found to overlap. A society can also consist of like-minded people governed by their own norms and values within a dominant, larger society. This is sometimes referred to as a subculture, a term used extensively within criminology: an organized group working together having a common interests, beliefs, or profession. More broadly, a society may be described as an economic, social, or industrial infrastructure, made up of a varied collection of individuals or subgroups. Members of a society may be from different ethnic groups. A society can be a particular ethnic group, such as the Saxons; a nation state, such as Bhutan; or a broader cultural group, such as a Western society. The word society may also refer to an organized voluntary association of people for religious, benevolent, cultural, scientific, political, patriotic, or other purposes. A "society" may also be a group of social organisms such as an ant colony, or any cooperative aggregate such as, for example, in some formulations of artificial intelligence. More about society… View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article The Tamil people are an ethnic group from South Asia with a recorded history going back almost two millennia. The oldest Tamil communities are those of southern India and north-eastern Sri Lanka. Unlike many ethnic groups, the Tamils have at no time been governed by a single political entity; Tamil?akam, the traditional name for the Tamil lands, has always been under the rule of more than one kingdom or state. Despite this, the Tamil cultural identity has always been strong. Historically, this identity has been primarily linguistic, with Tamils being those whose first language was Tamil. In recent times, however, the definition has been broadened to also include emigrants of Tamil descent who maintain Tamil traditions, even when they no longer speak the language. Tamils are ethnically, linguistically and culturally related to the other Dravidian peoples of South Asia. There are an estimated 74 million Tamils around the world. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured picture Credit: Photo: Marcello Casal Jr, Agência Brasil A United Nations vehicle patrols the streets of the Bel-Air neighborhood of Port-au-Prince in the aftermath of the catastrophic 2010 Haiti earthquake. The earthquake occurred at 16:53 local time (21:53 UTC) on Tuesday, 12 January 2010. An estimated three million people were affected by the earthquake, with an estimated 280,000 buildings severely damaged or destroyed. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Did you know... ... that the desert plants pale wolfberry (pictured) and Berlandier's wolfberry were both used by native Americans for medicinal purposes? ... that the Central Committee of the Commission for Organizing the Party of the Working People of Ethiopia included only one woman? ... that in 1992 the leader of the Gambela People's Liberation Movement, Agwa Alemu, was killed by his own troops? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Anniversaries this month 4 April 1930 - Foundation of the American Rocket Society, originally named the American Interplanetary Society 13 April 1564 - Pope Pius IV approved the Society of the Holy Name 19 April 1866 - First anti-cruelty law was passed since the founding of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Brooklyn chapter pictured) 22 April 2008 - IEEE Power Engineering Society changed its name to IEEE Power & Energy Society More anniversaries... edit   Selected biography Dyer Daniel Lum (1839–April 6, 1893) was a 19th-century American anarchist labor activist and poet. A leading anarcho-syndicalist and a prominent left-wing intellectual of the 1880s, he is remembered as the lover and mentor of early anarcha-feminist Voltairine de Cleyre. Lum was a prolific writer who wrote a number of key anarchist texts, and contributed to publications including Mother Earth, Twentieth Century, Liberty (Benjamin Tucker's individualist anarchist journal), The Alarm (the journal of the International Working People's Association) and The Open Court among others. Following the arrest of Albert Parsons, Lum edited The Alarm from 1892–1893. Traditionally portrayed as a "genteel, theoretical anarchist", Lum has recently been recast by the scholarship of Paul Avrich as an "uncompromising rebel thirsty for violence and martyrdom" in the light of his involvement in the Haymarket affair in 1886. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured audio January 28, 2008 – State of the Union Address by President George W. Bush George W. Bush's address, given on the first floor of the House of Representatives at the Capitol. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories Society ? Society portal ? Society by continent ? Society by nationality ? Sociology ? Fictional society ? Anti-social behaviour ? Business ? Civil society ? Clubs and societies ? Communication ? Corporate groups ? Crime ? Culture ? Disability ? Economics ? Education ? Social events ? Family ? Feminism and society ? Society in fiction ? Folklore ? Health ? Social history ? Home ? Humans ? Inequality ? Social institutions ? Social issues ? Society-related lists ? Mating systems ? Matronymics ? Medicine in society ? Military ? Society museums ? Nationality ? Organizations ? Patronymics ? People ? Philosophy and society ? Politics ? Postindustrial society ? Private law ? Race and society ? Religion and society ? Rural society ? Science in society ? Sexuality and society ? Social change ? Social media ? Social responsibility ? Social sciences ? Social work ? Socioeconomics ? Technology in society ? Water and society ? Wikipedia books on society ? Society portals edit   WikiProjects Related projects Community Ethnic groups Family and relationships Former countries Gender Studies LGBT studies Literature Sexology and sexuality Sociology Travel and Tourism What are WikiProjects? edit   Selected quote “ The basic discovery about any people is the discovery of the relationship between its men and its women. ” — Pearl S. Buck ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Recognized content Featured articles 2012 phenomenon W. E. B. Du Bois Female genital mutilation From The Doctor to my son Thomas Fuck (film) Fuck: Word Taboo and Protecting Our First Amendment Liberties Featured lists List of awards and nominations received by Penn & Teller: Bullshit! Good articles Timeline of the Egyptian revolution of 2011 Acting white African Americans in Omaha, Nebraska Agnosticism America's 60 Families Anarchism Anarchism in Cuba Anonymous (group) Anti-nuclear movement in Australia Archaeoastronomy Average Joe Balangoda Man Before the Dawn (book) Birth control Black Lives Matter Boerehaat The Bog People Bomis A Community of Witches Compulsory Miseducation Cult film Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact Culture of the Song dynasty Cutting the Mustard The Daily Stormer Demographics of the Supreme Court of the United States Diaphoneme Double burden Dreamtime (book) Émile Durkheim EST and The Forum in popular culture Ely and Littleport riots of 1816 Family in advertising Family structure in the United States Feminism Feminist economics The finger First World First interracial kiss on television Forensic anthropology Free Expression Policy Project Fucking Machines God's Choice Erving Goffman History of agriculture Hitachi Magic Wand Hooray Henry I Ching Globalization and women in China Insects in culture Ivatan people Java Man Joint custody (United States) Ralph Larkin Lesbian LGBT Long hair Magic, Witchcraft and the Otherworld The Man-Eating Myth March of loyalty to martyrs Karl Marx Josef Mengele A More Perfect Union: Advancing New American Rights Mork Goes Erk No Lifeguard on Duty Nonviolent Communication Not My Presidents Day Not in Front of the Children On the Internet, nobody knows you're a dog Otaku Polyethnicity Protests against the Sri Lankan Civil War in Canada Proto-globalization Racial wage gap in the United States Reborn doll The Road to Total Freedom Romania in the Early Middle Ages Royal intermarriage Edward Said Sex, Sin, and Blasphemy Sheng nu Social identity theory Sociology of leisure Sociology Stay-at-home dad Sustainability Team effectiveness Think of the children Truce term Max Weber Benjamin Lee Whorf Florian Znaniecki Featured pictures File:Jane Addams - Bain News Service.jpg edit   Things you can do Here are some tasks awaiting attention: Article requests?: Check article requests in Business and economics topics • Social sciences topics • Requested pictures of society topics Assess?: Check article deletion discussions listed at Deletion sorting – Social science Cleanup?: check new articles for cleanup from Sociology-related new article feed Copyedit?: Check Sociology article alerts for interesting articles to copyedit Expand?: Expand articles in categories including: Culture, Law, Education, Politics Featured article candidates?: Review society-related articles submitted at Featured Article candidates, especially those at FAC urgents Good article nominations?: Check out articles under review for Good Article candidacy, in the Social sciences and society section Maintain?: Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Stubs?: Take on project for improvement of one of the Sociology stubs Verify?: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability edit   Related portals Arts Biography Community Culture Death Education Freedom of speech Human rights Internet Law LGBT Mind and brain Philosophy Politics Religion Sexuality Social movements Sociology Technology Writing edit   Web resources Society at DMOZ Definition of Society from the OED. Lecture notes on "Defining Society" from East Carolina University. Internet Modern History Sourcebook: Industrial Revolution "The Day the World Took Off" Six part video series from the University of Cambridge tracing the question "Why did the Industrial Revolution begin when and where it did." BBC History Home Page – Industrial Revolution National Museum of Science and Industry website – machines and personalities Industrial Revolution and the Standard of Living by Clark Nardinelli - the debate over whether standards of living rose or fell. Cliff Notes on Types of Societies edit   Associated Wikimedia Society on Wikibooks  Society on Wikimedia Commons Society on Wikinews  Society on Wikiquote  Society on Wikisource  Society on Wikiversity  Society on Wiktionary  Manuals and books Images and media News Quotations Texts Learning resources Definitions What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Society&oldid=649229924" Categories: Society portal Society Society portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ??????? ???? ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? Català Cebuano Deutsch Eesti ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? Bahasa Indonesia ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Lëtzebuergesch ?????????? Nederlands ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ?????? Polski Português ??????? ????? Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Suomi ???????/tatarça Türkçe ???? ?????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 28 February 2015, at 14:11. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology |||Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Science History of science    Philosophy of science    Systems science    Mathematics    Biology    Chemistry    Physics    Earth sciences    Technology    edit   The Technology Portal Astronaut Technology is the practical use of science, including the making, modification or improvement, applied activity or behavior, use and knowledge of tools, machines, techniques, crafts, systems, methods of organization, or environmental modifications or arrangement in order to solve a problem, improve a preexisting solution to a problem, achieve a goal or perform a specific function. It can also refer to the collection of such tools, machinery, modifications, environmental arrangement and procedures. Technologies significantly affect human as well as other animal species' ability to control and adapt to their natural environments. The word technology comes from Greek ?????????? (technología); from ????? (téchn?), meaning 'art, skill, craft', and -????? (-logía), meaning 'study of-'. The term can be applied either generally or to many specific areas, examples of which include construction technology, medical technology and information technology. The human species' use of technology began with the conversion of natural resources into simple tools. The prehistorical discovery of the ability to control fire increased the available sources of food and the invention of the wheel helped humans in travelling in and controlling their environment. Recent technological developments, including the printing press, the telephone, and the Internet, have lessened physical barriers to communication and allowed humans to interact freely on a global scale. However, not all technology has been used for peaceful purposes; the development of weapons of ever-increasing destructive power has progressed throughout history, from clubs to nuclear weapons. Technology has affected society and its surroundings in a number of ways. In many societies, technology has helped develop more advanced economies (including today's global economy) and has allowed the rise of a leisure class. Many technological processes produce unwanted by-products, known as pollution, and deplete natural resources, to the detriment of the Earth and its environment. Various implementations of technology influence the values of a society and new technology often raises new ethical questions. Examples include the rise of the notion of efficiency in terms of human productivity, a term originally applied only to machines, and the challenge of traditional norms. Philosophical debates have arisen over the present and future use of technology in society, with disagreements over whether technology improves the human condition or worsens it. Neo-Luddism, anarcho-primitivism, and similar movements criticise the pervasiveness of technology in the modern world, opining that it harms the environment and alienates people; proponents of ideologies such as transhumanism and techno-progressivism view continued technological progress as beneficial to society and the human condition. Indeed, until recently, it was believed that the development of technology was restricted only to human beings, but recent scientific studies indicate that other primates and certain dolphin communities have developed simple tools and learned to pass their knowledge to other generations. More about Technology... Refresh selections edit   Selected article The Hanford Site is a decommissioned nuclear production complex on the Columbia River in south-central Washington operated by the United States government. Established in 1943 as part of the Manhattan Project, it was home to the B-Reactor, the first full-scale plutonium production reactor in the world. During the Cold War, the project was expanded to include nine nuclear reactors and five massive plutonium processing complexes, which produced plutonium for most of the 60,000 weapons in the U.S. nuclear arsenal. Nuclear technology developed rapidly during this period, and Hanford scientists produced many notable technological achievements. However, many of the early safety procedures and waste disposal practices were inadequate. Government documents have since confirmed that Hanford's operations released significant amounts of radioactive materials to the air and to the Columbia River, threatening the health of residents and ecosystems. Today, Hanford is the most contaminated nuclear site in the United States and is the focus of the nation's largest environmental cleanup effort. While most of the current activity at the site is related to the cleanup project, Hanford also hosts a commercial nuclear power plant, the Columbia Generating Station, and various centers for scientific research and development. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   In this month 2 April 1975 – Construction of the CN Tower in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, tops out, beginning the 553.33 metres (1,815.4 ft) tower's 34 year reign as the world's tallest free-standing structure 3 April 2010 – The first iPad (pictured) is released by Apple, Inc. 10 April 1861 – Governor of Massachusetts John Albion Andrew signs a charter incorporating the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 15 April 1912 – The RMS Titanic, at the time the world's largest ship, sinks after hitting an iceberg the night before in one of the deadliest peacetime maritime disasters in history More anniversaries... edit   Did you know... ... that in 2010, three of the four largest power stations in the world were in South America? ... that a Rans S-6 Coyote II (pictured), a type of homebuilt aircraft, has flown across the Atlantic Ocean twice? ... that Stephen Fry asked on Twitter for suggestions to name a BBC television series on the impact of the Internet, now called The Virtual Revolution? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured biography John Douglas (1830–1911) was an English architect who designed about 500 buildings in Cheshire, North Wales and northwest England, in particular in the estate of Eaton Hall. Douglas' output included the creation, restoration and renovation of churches, church furnishings, houses and other buildings. His architectural styles were eclectic and many of his works incorporate elements of the English Gothic style. He was also influenced by architectural styles from the mainland of Europe and included elements of French, German and Netherlandish architecture into his works. He is remembered for his use of half-timbering, tile-hanging, pargeting, decorative brick in diapering and the design of tall chimney stacks. Of particular importance is Douglas' use of joinery and highly detailed wood carving. Throughout his career he attracted commissions from wealthy landowners and industrialists. Most of his works have survived. The city of Chester contains a number of his structures, the most admired of which are his half-timbered black-and-white buildings and Eastgate Clock. The highest concentration of his work is found in the Eaton Hall estate and the surrounding villages of Eccleston, Aldford and Pulford. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Wikiprojects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Telecommunications Woodworking What are WikiProjects? edit   Selected quote “ If the Internet teaches us anything, it is that great value comes from leaving core resources in a commons, where they're free for people to build upon as they see fit. ” — Lawrence Lessig, (2001) ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Selected picture Credit: Maas Digital LLC NASA's Mars Exploration Rover Mission (MER) is an ongoing robotic space mission involving two rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, exploring the planet Mars. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories Computing · Classes of computers · Companies · Computer architecture · Computer model · Computer science · Computer security · Computing and society · Data · Embedded systems · Information systems · Information technology · Internet · Languages · Multimedia · Networks · Operating systems · Platforms · Product lifecycle management · Real-time computing · Software · Security ·More... Electronics · Avionics · RF & MMIC Design · Circuits · Companies · Connectors · Consumer electronics · Digital electronics · Digital media · Electrical components · Electronic design · Electronics manufacturing · Embedded systems · Integrated circuits · Microwave technology · Molecular electronics · Water technology · Optoelectronics · Quantum electronics · Radio-frequency identification · Radio electronics · Semiconductors · Signal cables · Surveillance · Telecommunications · Terminology · More... Engineering: Aerospace engineering · Biological engineering · Chemical engineering · Civil engineering · Computer engineering · Electrical engineering · Electronic engineering · Environmental engineering · Geotechnical engineering · Industrial engineering · Marine engineering · Materials science · Mechanical engineering · Nuclear technology · Signal processing · Software engineering · Structural engineering Transport · Aviation · Rail transport · Spaceflight · Road transport · Water transport Timelines: Technology timelines Other sub-categories: Agriculture · Animation · Architecture · Carpentry · Communications · Education · Electrical wiring · Machining · Manufacturing · Medicine · Metalworking · Optics · Plumbing · Tools · Welding · Woodworking edit   Main topics Technology Technological concepts and issues – Appropriate technology • Clean technology • Diffusion of innovations in science • Doomsday device • Ecotechnology • Environmental technology • High technology • History of science and technology • History of technology • Industry • Innovation • Knowledge economy • Persuasion technology • Pollution • Posthumanism • Precautionary principle • Research and development • Science, technology, and society • Strategy of technology • Superpowers • Sustainable technology • Technicism • Technocapitalism • Technocriticism • Techno-progressivism • Technological convergence • Technological evolution • Technological determinism • Technological diffusion • Technological singularity • Technology acceptance model • Technology assessment • Technology lifecycle • Technology transfer • Technology Tree • Technorealism • Timeline of invention • Transhumanism Technologies and applied sciences – Aerospace • Agriculture, Agricultural science & Agronomy • Architecture • Artificial intelligence • Automation • Automobile • Big Science • Biotechnology • Cartography • Chemical engineering • Communication • Computing (Computer science, List of open problems in computer science, Programming, Software engineering, Information technology, Computer engineering) • Construction • Design • Electronics • Energy development • Energy storage • Engineering • Ergonomics • Firefighting • Forensics • Forestry • Free software • Health sciences • Health Informatics • Industry • Information science • Internet • Library and information science • Machines • Management • Manufacturing • Mass communication • Mass production • Medicine (Unsolved problems in neuroscience) • Military science • Military technology and equipment • Mining • Nanotechnology • Nuclear technology • Packaging and labeling • Processes • Robotics • Space exploration • Technology forecasting • Telecommunications • Tools • Transport • Vehicles • Weapons edit   News From the Wikinews Science and technology portal April 8: GNOME to be Ubuntu's default desktop environment, Canonical to stop investing in Ubuntu Phone March 27: President Trump tells NASA to aim for Mars March 22: Jeff Jones resigns as president of Uber March 9: Scientists say excess cerebrospinal fluid may serve as early sign of autism February 9: Scientists say new medical diagnostic chip can sort cells anywhere with an inkjet January 15: Geneticists produce laser-activated killer mice January 4: Slow-cooking dinosaur eggs may have contributed to extinction, say scientists December 29: Around 7,100 cheetahs remain, say experts December 26: Study confirms efficacy of NewLink Genetics ebola vaccine December 11: Scientists find dinosaur feathers preserved in amber edit   Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures edit   Related portals Agriculture and Agronomy Astronomy Aviation Biotechnology Bridges Computer science Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Health Infrastructure Information technology Mathematics Medicine Nanotechnology Nuclear technology Philosophy of science Radio Renewable energy Robotics Science Software Spaceflight Sustainable development Telecom Television Trains Transport War edit   Associated Wikimedia Technology on Wikibooks  Technology on Wikimedia Commons Technology on Wikinews  Technology on Wikiquote  Technology on Wikisource  Technology on Wikiversity  Technology on Wiktionary  Manuals and books Images and media News Quotations Texts Learning resources Definitions edit   Wikipedia's portals All Portals Overview Glossaries Indices Lists Outlines Categories Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Featured portals About portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=737901506" Categories: Technology portal Technology portals Technology Science portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages ???? ??????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? Bahasa Indonesia ????? ??????? Kurdî Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? Nederlands ??? ??????? Occitan ????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ?????? ??????? Suomi Svenska ????? Taqbaylit Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? ???? Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 5 September 2016, at 18:25. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Contents/Portals |||Portal:Contents/Portals From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia < Portal:Contents Jump to: navigation, search Contents Overview Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology edit  watch   Wikipedia's contents: Portals General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places    Health and fitness     History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences    People and self    Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences About portals · Portal directory · Portals category Shortcuts: P: P:CP WP:8 WP:PORT Portals complement main topics in Wikipedia, and expound upon topics by introducing the reader to key articles, images, and categories that further describe the subject and its related topics. Portals also assist in helping editors to find related projects and things they can do to improve Wikipedia, and provide a unique way to navigate Wikipedia topics. At present, there are 1491 portals. WikiProject Directory Regional Notice Boards You can also use the Special:Search box below to locate Portals and sub-pages. edit  watch   General reference   (see in all page types) Library and information science edit  watch   Culture and the arts   (see in all page types) Culture Language: Constructed languages (Esperanto), English Arts (Aesthetics) Literature: Books • Comics • Children's literature • French literature • Poetry • Writing Authors: Jane Austen • Charles Dickens • William Shakespeare • Oscar Wilde • Kazi Nazrul Islam Novels: Dragonlance, Harry Potter, Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy Fictional worlds: Discworld, James Bond, Middle-earth, Narnia, Oz, Fictional characters Performing arts Dance: Ballet Film: A Nightmare on Elm Street, Academy Award, Alien, Animation, Bollywood, Disney, Indiana Jones, Silent film, Star Wars Music: Music of Australia • Music of Canada  • Record production Styles: Alternative rock, Blues, Christian music, Classical guitar, Classical music, Country music, Electronic music, Eurovision, Guitar, Heavy metal (Christian metal), Hip hop, Indian classical music, Industrial music, Jazz, K-pop, Latin music, Marching band, Percussion, Piano, Pipe organ, Pop music, Progressive rock, Punk rock, Rock and Roll, Rock music, R&B and Soul Music Artists: AC/DC, AKB48, A. R. Rahman, Bryan Adams, Aerosmith, Christina Aguilera, Backstreet Boys, The Beach Boys, The Beatles, Justin Bieber, Björk, Brandy Norwood, Mariah Carey, Cher, Kelly Clarkson, The Clash, Miley Cyrus, Celine Dion, Dream Theater, Bob Dylan, Grateful Dead, Eminem, Fergie, Marvin Gaye, Girls Aloud, Green Day, Iron Maiden, The Jackson Family, Janet Jackson, Michael Jackson, The Kinks, Beyoncé, Lady Gaga, Avril Lavigne, Led Zeppelin, Linkin Park, Madonna, Miles Davis, Motörhead, Katy Perry, Pink Floyd, Powderfinger, Elvis Presley, Queen, Rihanna, The Rolling Stones, Sakis Rouvas, Rush, Santana, Britney Spears, The Supremes, Slipknot, Shania Twain, Shreya Ghoshal, U2, Usher, Rufus Wainwright, Neil Young, Frank Zappa, Shakira Opera: Gilbert & Sullivan Television: Australian television, BBC, The Big Bang Theory, Buffy the Vampire Slayer, Cartoon Network, Doctor Who, EastEnders, Ed, Edd n Eddy, Family Guy, Friends, Futurama, House, M.D., M*A*S*H, Millennium, Monty Python, Muppets, Nickelodeon, SpongeBob SquarePants, Star Trek, 24, The Simpsons, Sherlock Holmes Theatre: Musical theatre Visual arts: Portal:Anime and manga (Dragon Ball) • Architecture (Portal) • Cartoon • Computer graphics • Design • Graffiti • Origami • Photography • Studio Ghibli • Textile arts (Fashion, Knitting) • Typography Genre: Comedy • Furry • Horror fiction • King Arthur • Mythology • Pornography • Speculative fiction • Steampunk • Superhero fiction Recreation and Entertainment Food: Bacon Drink: Beer, Coffee, Liquor, Wine Sports: Asian Games · Association football (A-League, Football in Argentina, Association football variants, Football in Africa, Football in Germany, Football in India, English football, Soccer in the United States, Women's association football) • Athletics • Australian rules football • Badminton • Baseball • Basketball (College basketball, National Basketball Association) • Sport of Canada • Commonwealth Games • Cricket (Australian cricket team in England in 1948, Indian Premier League) • Cycling • Fencing • Figure skating • Fishing • Gridiron football (American football, Canadian football, College football, National Football League) • Golf • Gymnastics • Handball • Horse racing • Ice hockey • Martial arts (Karate) • Olympics • Paralympics • Professional wrestling • Racing (Motorsport: Formula One, NASCAR, Motorcycle racing) • Rock climbing • Rugby (Rugby league, Rugby union) • Sailing • Snooker • Tennis • Water sports (Swimming, Underwater diving)  • Women's sport Games: Amusement parks • Strategy games (Chess, Warhammer) • Role-playing games (Dungeons & Dragons) Video games: Final Fantasy • Halo • Mario • Massively multiplayer online games • Nintendo • PlayStation • Pokémon • Sega • SNK  • The Sims • Sonic the Hedgehog • Xbox • Zelda Hobbies, Crafts and Other: Gardening • Gemology and Jewelry • Home improvement • Numismatics • Philately • Radio • Scouting • Toys (Lego) edit  watch   Geography and places   (see in all page types) Geography (Atlas • Islands • Mountains) Africa Algeria • Angola • Benin • Botswana • Burkina Faso • Burundi • Cameroon • Cape Verde • Central African Republic • Chad • Côte d'Ivoire • Republic of the Congo • Democratic Republic of the Congo • Djibouti • Egypt • Eritrea • Ethiopia • Gabon • The Gambia • Ghana • Guinea • Guinea-Bissau • Kenya  (Mombasa, Nairobi) • Liberia • Libya • Madagascar • Malawi • Mali • Mauritania • Mauritius • Morocco • Mozambique • Namibia • Niger • Nigeria (Port Harcourt, Lagos)  • Rwanda • São Tomé and Príncipe • Senegal • Sierra Leone • Somalia • South Africa • South Sudan • Sudan • Tanzania • Togo • Tunisia • Uganda • Western Sahara • Zambia • Zimbabwe Antarctica • Arctic Asia Bhutan • Bangladesh • (Bengal, Chittagong, Dhaka) • Cambodia • China (Beijing, Hong Kong, Macau, Shanghai, Shenzhen, Tibet) • Taiwan • Himalaya region • India (Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal (Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Chandigarh, Chennai, Delhi, Hisar, Hyderabad, Kolkata, Kollam, Mumbai, Patna, Trichy, Udaipur, Jodhpur) • Indonesia • Japan (Osaka, Tokyo) • Kazakhstan • Korea (North Korea, South Korea, Seoul) • Kyrgyzstan • Malaysia • Mongolia • Nepal • Pakistan (Chitral, Karachi, Lahore, Jhelum, Islamabad, Sialkot) • Philippines (Bohol) • Punjab • SAARC • Singapore • Sri Lanka • Tajikistan • Thailand • Turkey • Vietnam Europe European Union Austria (Vienna, Tyrol) • Basque • Belgium (Brussels) • Bulgaria • Channel Islands • Corsica • Croatia • Czech Republic (Prague) • Denmark • Estonia • Finland • France (Paris, Lyon) • Germany (Baden-Württemberg • Bavaria • East Frisia • Hamburg • Lower Saxony • North Rhine-Westphalia • Saxony-Anhalt • Schleswig-Holstein) • Gibraltar • Greece (Macedonia) • Hungary (Budapest, Miskolc) • Ireland (Kilkenny) • Italy (Rome, Milan, Venice) • Latvia • Lithuania • Luxembourg • Malta • Netherlands • Poland • Portugal • Romania  (Bucharest) • Silesia • Slovakia • Slovenia • Spain (Galicia) • Sweden • United Kingdom (England (Bristol, Cornwall, Devon, Hertfordshire, Lincolnshire, London, Luton, Stamford, North West England (Cheshire, Cumbria, Greater Manchester, Merseyside, Yorkshire), Somerset, Wiltshire, South East England (East Sussex, Kent, Hampshire, Oxfordshire)) • Northern Ireland, Scotland, Wales) Albania (Tirana) • Andorra • Armenia • Azerbaijan • Belarus • Bosnia and Herzegovina • Catalan-speaking countries • Faroe Islands • Georgia • Iceland • Isle of Man • Kosovo • Republic of Macedonia • Moldova • Montenegro • Norway • Russia  (Chechnya, Moscow) • Serbia • Switzerland (Geneva) • Turkey • Ukraine (Crimea) • Vatican City Latin America and Caribbean Argentina (Buenos Aires • Rosario)  • Belize • Bermuda • Brazil • Bolivia • Chile (Pichilemu) • Colombia • Costa Rica • Cuba • Dominican Republic • Ecuador • El Salvador • Guatemala • Guyana • Haiti • Jamaica • Mexico • Nicaragua • Panama • Paraguay • Peru • Puerto Rico • Suriname • Trinidad and Tobago • Uruguay • Venezuela Places near you Middle East Afghanistan • Cyprus • Egypt • Iran (Tabaristan) • Iraq • Israel (Jerusalem) • Jordan • Kazakhstan • Kurdistan • Lebanon • Libya • Morocco • Oman • Palestine • Saudi Arabia • Syria • Tajikistan • Turkey • United Arab Emirates (Abu Dhabi) • Uzbekistan  North America Canada:  • Geography of Canada Alberta (Calgary, Edmonton) • British Columbia (Vancouver) • Manitoba • New Brunswick • Newfoundland and Labrador (St. John's) • Northwest Territories • Nova Scotia • Nunavut • Ontario (Eastern Ontario • Ottawa •Toronto • Hamilton) • Prince Edward Island  • Quebec (Montreal, Quebec City, Estrie, Laurentides, Saguenay–Lac-Saint-Jean) • Saskatchewan • Yukon Mexico  San Diego–Tijuana United States Alabama • Alaska • Arizona (Grand Canyon) • Arkansas • California (Greater Los Angeles • San Diego • San Diego–Tijuana, San Francisco Bay Area) • Colorado • Connecticut • Delaware • District of Columbia • Florida  (Jacksonville • Miami) • Georgia • Hawaii • Idaho • Illinois (Chicago) • Indiana (Indianapolis) • Iowa • Kansas • Kentucky (Louisville) • Louisiana (New Orleans) • Maine • Maryland • Massachusetts  (Boston) • Michigan (Detroit) • Minnesota • Mississippi • Missouri • Montana • Nebraska • Nevada (Las Vegas) • New England • New Hampshire • New Jersey • New Mexico • New York (New York City • Capital District • Finger Lakes • Hudson Valley • Syracuse) • North Carolina • North Dakota • Ohio (Cleveland) • Oklahoma • Oregon • Pennsylvania (Erie • Lancaster • Philadelphia • Pittsburgh) • Puerto Rico • Rhode Island • South Carolina • South Dakota • Tennessee • Texas (Austin • Dallas • Houston) • Utah • Vermont • Virginia • Washington (Seattle) • West Virginia • Wisconsin • Wyoming Oceania Australia Australian Capital Territory • New South Wales (City of Bankstown • Sydney) • Northern Territory • Queensland (Brisbane) • South Australia • Tasmania • Victoria (Melbourne) • Western Australia (Perth) Kiribati • Micronesia • New Zealand • Papua New Guinea • Tuvalu edit  watch   Health and fitness   (see in all page types) Health and fitness Medicine • Biology • Nursing • Dentistry • Food • Pharmacy and Pharmacology • Psychiatry • Pervasive developmental disorders • Complementary and Alternative Medicine • Sexuality • Viruses • Trauma & Orthopaedics • Sports edit  watch   History and events   (see in all page types) History American Old West • Ancient Egypt • Ancient Germanic Culture • Ancient Greece • Ancient Japan • Ancient Near East • Ancient Rome (Military of ancient Rome) • Anglo-Saxon England • Crown of Aragon • Archaeology • Ashura • Austria-Hungary • British Empire • Bulgarian Empire • Byzantine Empire • Classical Civilization • Colonialism • Disasters  • German Empire • Heraldry • History of Canada • History of the Latter Day Saint movement • History of Science • Indian independence movement • Khitan • Mesoamerica • Middle Ages • Nazi Germany • New France • Russian Empire • Sasanian Empire • Soviet Union  War:American Revolutionary War • American Civil War • Cold War • Italian Wars • Liberation War • Military history of France • Military history of Africa • Military history of the Ottoman Empire • Napoleonic Wars • September 11 attacks • Syrian civil war • World War I • World War II 1920s • 1930s • 1940s • 1950s • 1960s • 1970s • 1980s • 1990s • 2000s • 2010s Current events Sports Time Winter • Autumn Chronology edit  watch   Mathematics and logic   (see in all page types) Mathematics Algebra • Analysis • Category theory • Cryptography • Discrete mathematics • Geometry • Number theory • Topology Logic Set theory  Statistics  edit  watch   Natural and physical sciences   (see in all page types) Science History of Science • Philosophy of science • Systems science Biological science Agropedia • Amphibians and Reptiles • Animals • Arthropods • Astrobiology • Birds • Cats • Cetaceans • Crustaceans • Dinosaurs • Dogs • Ecology • Evolutionary biology • Extinct and Endangered Species • Fish • Forestry • Fungi • Gastropods • Horses • Insects  • Mammals • Marine life • Molecular Anthropology • Molecular and Cellular Biology (Metabolism, Gene wiki) • Neuroscience • Paleontology • Plants • Primates • Prehistoric mammals • Rabbits and hares • Sharks • Trees • Turtles • Viruses • Wildlife of Scotland • Wetlands Physical science Astronomy (Space, Solar System, Mars, Moon, Uranus, Jupiter, Star, X-ray astronomy)  Chemistry (Analytical chemistry, Organic chemistry, Physical chemistry, Crystallography)  Earth sciences (Atmospheric sciences, Earthquakes, Environment, Fire, Global warming, Tropical cyclones, Volcanoes and Volcanology, Weather, Water)  Physics (Cosmology, Gravitation, Electromagnetism) edit  watch   People and self   (see in all page types) Biography • Death • Human rights • Community • Gangs • Mind and brain • Thinking • Sexuality • LGBT • Serer • Transgender • Yoruba • Igbo edit  watch   Philosophy and thinking   (see in all page types) Philosophy Areas of philosophical inquiry Aesthetics • Epistemology • Ethics • Logic • Metaphysics • Mind and Brain (Thinking) • Philosophy of science • Social and political philosophy  Philosophies and ideologies Anarchism • Animal rights • Capitalism • Communism • Confucianism • Conservatism • Existentialism • Fascism • Liberalism • Libertarianism • Left-wing populism • Right-wing populism • Socialism • Taoism • Transhumanism edit  watch   Religion and belief systems   (see in all page types) Religion (Spirituality, Occult) Abrahamic religions Christianity Adventism • Anabaptism • Anglicanism • Arminianism • Baptist • Bible • Calvinism • Catholicism • Christadelphians • Christianity in China • Christianity in India • Eastern Christianity • Lutheranism • Methodism • Oriental Orthodoxy • Pope • Private revelation • Saints • Seventh-day Adventist Church Latter Day Saints Book of Mormon • LDS Church • Community of Christ Islam Shia Islam • Day Of Ashura • Ahmadiyyat • Qur'an • Islam in China • Sufism Judaism Kabbalah Creationism Non-Abrahamic religions Indian religions Ayyavazhi Buddhism Mahayana Buddhism • Tibetan Buddhism • Vajrayana Buddhism • Theravada Buddhism Gnosticism Hinduism Hindu Mythology  Jainism Digambara ?v?t?mbara Sikhism Religions and traditions with East Asian origin Chinese Folk Religion Confucianism • Shinto • Taoism • Falun Gong Religions with West Asian origin Zoroastrianism Bábism Bahá'í Faith New religions Scientology • Falun Gong  Theosophy Religions with European origin Heathenism Hellenismos Greek Mythology Wicca Traditional African religions African Serer Other Astrology • Mythology Non Religion or Belief Atheism • Nontheism edit  watch   Society and social sciences   (see in all page types) Social sciences Anthropology (Archaeology) • Economics • Education • Geography • History • Law • Linguistics • Psychology • Sociology Society Cooperatives • Disability • Discrimination • Economics and business  • Education (Schools, University, University of Cambridge, University of Oxford, University of Pittsburgh) • Environment • Ethnic groups: African American, Berbers, Celts, Hispanic and Latino Americans, Indigenous peoples of the Americas, Indigenous peoples of North America, Aboriginal Canadians •  Feminism • Folklore • Freedom of speech • Freemasonry • Gender studies • Genealogy • Globalization • Holidays • Hunger relief • Journalism • LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender) • (Transgender) • Men's rights • Social movements • Sustainable development • Terrorism • Transhumanism • Transnational child protection•Migrant Domestic Workers in Lebanon Law Criminal justice• Human rights • Law of England and Wales• Laws in India • Supreme Court of the United States Politics and Political science Anarchism • Animal rights • British politics • Capitalism • Communism • Canadian politics • Christian democracy • Conservatism • Fascism • Geert Wilders • India Government • Liberalism • Right-wing populism • International organizations: (United Nations  • NATO • SAARC) • Organized Labour • Pakistan Government • Philippine Presidency • Republican Party • U.S. Government (Barack Obama) • Donald Trump  • Social welfare and social work Military science Canadian Forces • Military of Greece • Military of Australia • Military of the United Kingdom (British Army • Royal Navy • Royal Air Force) • Military of the United States (United States Air Force • United States Army • United States Coast Guard • United States Marine Corps • United States Navy) • Tank • Half-track • War • Weapons of mass destruction edit  watch   Technology and applied sciences   (see in all page types) Technology Engineering • Agriculture and Agronomy  • Astronomy • Biotechnology • Bridges • Electronics (Telecommunication) • Mass surveillance • Energy (Renewable energy) • Forestry • Hazardous Materials • Infrastructure • Laser • Mining • Nanotechnology • Nuclear technology • Robotics Computing and Information technology Computer networking (Internet, IRC) • Computer programming (Python programming, Java) • Computer science (Artificial intelligence, Computer graphics) • Computer security (Cryptography) • Software (Free software, Linux) • Amiga  • Smartphone • Apple  • Google (Android) • Microsoft• Alphabet Transport Aviation • Bicycles/Cycling • Buses • Cars (Australian, Japanese) • Trucks • London Transport • Nautical (Lighthouses, UK Waterways) • Roads (Australian Roads, Canada Roads, U.S. Roads, California Roads, Maryland Roads, Michigan Highways, New York Roads, Washington Roads) • Spaceflight • Trains (North American railways, Railways in India, Sri Lanka Railways, UK Railways, Trams, UK Trams) Portals List Directory WikiProject Guidelines Instructions Categorizing (Portals category) Contents Overview Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Content listings Types Overviews Featured content Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories People deaths this year Timelines centuries decades Indices A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Wikipedia books What are portals? List of portals Shortcuts to this page: Portal:Categories • P:CAT Purge cache to show recent changes Shortcuts to this page: WP:PORT • P: Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Contents/Portals&oldid=746645444" Categories: Wikipedia navigation Content portals Portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Afrikaans Alemannisch ??????? Aragonés Arpetan ??????? ???? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Brezhoneg Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Frysk ??? ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Lëtzebuergesch Lumbaart Magyar ???? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? ????????? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Ripoarisch Român? ??????? Shqip Sicilianu ????? ???? Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ???? Vèneto Ti?ng Vi?t ?? Yorùbá ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 28 October 2016, at 17:20. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Stephen_Breyer_official_SCOTUS_portrait_crop.jpg |||File:Stephen Breyer official SCOTUS portrait crop.jpg From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this preview: 480 × 600 pixels. Other resolutions: 192 × 240 pixels | 384 × 480 pixels | 1,008 × 1,260 pixels. Original file ?(1,008 × 1,260 pixels, file size: 1.01 MB, MIME type: image/jpeg) This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary[edit] DescriptionStephen Breyer official SCOTUS portrait crop.jpg Official portrait of Supreme Court Justice Stephen Breyer. Date 2006 Source http://www.supremecourthistory.org/history/supremecourthistory_history_current_breyer.htm Author Steve Petteway, photographer for the US Supreme Court[1] Licensing[edit] Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work prepared by an officer or employee of the United States Government as part of that person’s official duties under the terms of Title 17, Chapter 1, Section 105 of the US Code. See Copyright. Note: This only applies to original works of the Federal Government and not to the work of any individual U.S. state, territory, commonwealth, county, municipality, or any other subdivision. This template also does not apply to postage stamp designs published by the United States Postal Service since 1978. (See § 313.6(C)(1) of Compendium of U.S. Copyright Office Practices). It also does not apply to certain US coins; see The US Mint Terms of Use. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law, including all related and neighboring rights. This file was reviewed on 29 September 2010 by the administrator or trusted user Jappalang (talk), who confirmed the Public Domain status on that date. Personality rightsPersonality rights warning Although this work is freely licensed or in the public domain, the person(s) shown may have rights that legally restrict certain re-uses unless those depicted consent to such uses. In these cases, a model release or other evidence of consent could protect you from infringement claims. Though not obliged to do so, the uploader may be able to help you to obtain such evidence. See our general disclaimer for more information. File history Click on a date/time to view the file as it appeared at that time. Date/Time Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 13:47, 10 August 2009 1,008 × 1,260 (1.01 MB) Gage {{Information |Description=Official portrait of Supreme Court Justice Stephen Breyer. |Source=http://www.supremecourthistory.org/02_history/subs_current/images_b/009.html |Date=2006 |Author=Collection of the Supreme Court of the United States, Photographe File usage More than 100 pages link to this file. The following list shows the first 100 page links to this file only. A full list is available. List of Jewish American politicians Supreme Court of the United States Talk:Main Page/Archive 34 User:4v4l0n42/Draft 6L User:4v4l0n42/Today User:Afterword User:Afterword/pretty User:AlMac User:Allard User:Bannus User:Brian/mainpage User:David Levy/Main2 User:David Levy/Test User:David Levy/Test2 User:Dbmag9/Main Page User:Drumguy8800/Main page draft User:ElAmericano/storage/mainpage1 User:Eloquence/Tour 01 User:Encephalon/Main User:FayssalF User:Getcrunk/Main Page Sandbox User:Go for it!/MP/nodiv User:Hemanshu/edmainpage User:Interiot/Main User:Jcrwiki~enwiki User:JonMoore/Main Page User:JustinWick/mydraft User:Kevin baas~enwiki/main page proposal User:Krik~enwiki/mp User:Krik~enwiki/nmp User:LEC20/Daily Diversions User:Lovelac7 User:Malomeat User:MarSch/Main body User:MarSch/Main page User:MattKingston User:Member/Wikipedia Front Page User:Mulad/portal User:Nickg331 User:NoSeptember/Main User:Node ue/MainPageTemplate2 User:Persian Poet Gal User:Porges/Main Page User:Quentin Smith/Shadow Main Page User:Ral315/Main Page User:RaptorX User:Siroxo/main page draft User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-22Jul User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-23Jul User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-24Jul User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-25Jul User:Somoza/Zero-Phonon User:Talrias/Main Page User:Tazmaniacs User:The bellman User:Thetorpedodog/xptablefree User:Tim Robinson/Main Page (Proposal) User:Tom-/Main Page CSS test User:Tom-/NS4 test User:Tom-/sandbox User:U-Two User:Vincent7 User:Zafiroblue05/Draft User talk:Guty~enwiki User talk:Kevin baas~enwiki/main page proposal Wikipedia:Main Page/French2 Wikipedia:Main Page/Temp10 Wikipedia:Main Page/Test Wikipedia:Main Page/test Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (Italian-style) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (Old PDA version) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (blue boy) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (editable) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (executive) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (misty breeze) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (regal) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (shades of blue) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (simple layout) Wikipedia:Today's featured article Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft/Draft 5 Archive Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft/Sj Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft/Test Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft2 Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft2 (fullsize text) Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft (Italian Inspired) Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft (current templates) Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft 0 Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft 6C Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft A Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft B Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft C Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft L Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft NOW Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft extra search box Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft extra search box2 Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft no search box Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/NOW Global file usage The following other wikis use this file: Usage on cs.wikipedia.org Nejvyšší soud Spojených stát? amerických Usage on de.wikipedia.org Liste der Richter am Obersten Gerichtshof der Vereinigten Staaten Usage on es.wikipedia.org Estados Unidos contra Lara Usage on fa.wikipedia.org ????? ??????????? ????? ???????? Usage on it.wikipedia.org Corte suprema degli Stati Uniti d'America Usage on ja.wikipedia.org ???????? Usage on ko.wikipedia.org ?? ?? ??? Usage on mr.wikipedia.org ????????? ???????? ???????? Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Suprema Corte dos Estados Unidos Usage on ru.wikipedia.org ????????? ??? ??? Usage on sh.wikipedia.org Vrhovni sud SAD Usage on sv.wikipedia.org USA:s högsta domstol Usage on tl.wikipedia.org Kataas-taasang Hukuman ng Estados Unidos Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Amerika Birle?ik Devletleri Yüksek Mahkemesi Usage on zh.wikipedia.org ?????? Metadata This file contains additional information, probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state, some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Orientation Normal Horizontal resolution 300 dpi Vertical resolution 300 dpi Software used Adobe Photoshop 7.0 File change date and time 08:52, 10 August 2009 Color space sRGB Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Stephen_Breyer_official_SCOTUS_portrait_crop.jpg" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces File Talk Variants Views Read View on Commons More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Upload file Special pages Page information Languages Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heffernan_v._City_of_Paterson |||Heffernan v. City of Paterson From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Heffernan v. City of Paterson Supreme Court of the United States Argued January 19, 2016 Decided April 26, 2016 Full case name Jeffrey Heffernan, Petitioner v. City of Paterson, et al. Docket nos. 14-1280 Citations 578 U.S. ___ (more) Opinion announcement Opinion announcement Prior history Jury finds in favor of the plaintiff, judge recuses for conflict of interest and case is retried; summary judgement in favor of the defense; Third Circuit reverses and remands; decision for the defense on remand; Third Circuit affirms Holding Police department's demotion of detective in response to mistaken belief he was supporting a challenger to the city's mayor in election violated his First Amendment rights regardless of his actual purpose. Judgement of the Third Circuit reversed and remanded. Court membership Chief Justice John G. Roberts Associate Justices Anthony Kennedy Clarence Thomas · Ruth Bader Ginsburg Stephen Breyer · Samuel Alito Sonia Sotomayor · Elena Kagan Case opinions Majority Breyer, joined by Roberts, Kennedy, Ginsburg, Sotomayor, Kagan Dissent Thomas, joined by Alito Laws applied U.S. Const. amend. I 42 U.S.C. § 1983 Heffernan v. City of Paterson, No. 14-1280, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in 2016 concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees. By a 6–2 margin, the Court held that a public employee's constitutional rights might be violated when an employer, believing that the employee was engaging in what would be protected speech, disciplines them because of that belief, even if the employee did not exercise such a constitutional right. The case was brought after Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey police force, went to a distribution center and picked up a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor in the 2005 election (Heffernan's mother had wanted a sign, so he was getting one for her). While Heffernan did not support the challenger, after other officers saw him with the sign they told senior officers, including the police chief, who strongly supported the mayor. For his apparent public support of the other candidate, they demoted Heffernan to beat patrol work as a uniformed officer. Heffernan brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his First Amendment rights. The case took a decade to reach the Supreme Court. For most of that time it was in federal district court, where it was heard by three different judges. A jury verdict in Heffernan's favor was set aside. A later summary judgment in the city's favor was overturned on appeal before being granted again in the third trial.[1] Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer stated that the department's belief was all that mattered, since the Court's precedent in this area holds it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee (who does not work under a contract that explicitly permits such discipline) for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion in which he was joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed, but his constitutional rights had not been violated. Contents 1 Legal background 2 Prior history 2.1 Original dispute 2.2 District court 2.3 Court of Appeals 2.4 Supreme Court 2.4.1 Oral arguments 3 Opinion of the Court 3.1 Dissent 4 Commentary 5 Aftermath 6 See also 7 References Legal background[edit] The First Amendment guarantees the rights of freedom of speech and peaceable assembly, among others. While not explicitly mentioned, the Supreme Court has held that the right to assembly includes the freedom of association, particularly political association.[2] These protections not only prohibit the government from passing laws which infringe upon these rights, but also from taking actions which would violate them. While the Bill of Rights—which includes the First Amendment—applied originally only to the federal government, the ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment allowed for the application of the Bill of Rights to the states under the incorporation doctrine.[3] In order to better protect these rights in the Reconstruction Era, Congress passed the Second Enforcement Act of 1871 at the request of President Ulysses S. Grant to better counter white supremacist organizations such as the Ku Klux Klan that were intimidating and suppressing voting by black citizens.[4] The act provided a remedy for those citizens who were deprived of their constitutional rights under the "color of any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage, of any State or Territory or the District of Columbia" and is currently codified at 42 U.S.C. § 1983.[5] With its decision in Monroe v. Pape (1961), the Court expanded the reach of section 1983 such that it is now used as a method of checking abuse by state officials who infringe upon constitutionally protected rights.[6][7] The First Amendment protects public employees from retaliation by their employer when speaking on matters of public concern.[8] In Pickering v. Board of Education (1968), the Court first articulated the right of public employees to be protected from dismissal for exercising their right to free speech. There, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of a teacher who was fired after writing a letter to a local newspaper critical of its handling of a recent bond issue.[9] Eight years later, this protection from dismissal was extended to cover partisan political ideology and affiliation in Elrod v. Burns.[8] But the Court has recognized that the "government as employer" has wider constitutional latitude in its decisions than the "government as sovereign".[10] In order to adequately delineate the limits of the government-as-employer's discretion, the Court developed a framework in Connick v. Myers (1983) known as the Connick test. It consists of elements. The first is the threshold a plaintiff must pass to state a claim: the plaintiff must show that they were speaking on a matter of public concern. The second falls to the employer: they must show that the harm to workplace efficiency outweighs the harm caused by infringing upon the right to free speech.[11] In Waters v. Churchill (1994), the Court was faced with two differing accounts of the speech at issue. The question presented to the Court was whether the Connick test ought be applied to what the employer thought was said or what was actually said. The case revolved around a nurse dismissed for a conversation she had with a coworker. There was a discrepancy between what she argued was said and what her employer thought was said. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, joined by a plurality of justices, opined that the Connick test must be applied to the speech the employer thought occurred, and on which it acted, rather than that which the finder of fact determines did occur.[12] Prior history[edit] Original dispute[edit] Downtown Paterson In 2005, Jeffrey Heffernan was a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey police. His supervisor and the chief of police were both appointed by the city's incumbent mayor, Jose Torres, who was being challenged by city councilman Lawrence Spagnola in that year's election. Heffernan was friendly with Spagnola, a former police chief,[1] and informally supported his campaign. He could not vote in the election as he did not live in the city.[13] At the request of his sick mother, who did live in the city, Heffernan while off-duty picked up a Spagnola lawn sign for her after her previous sign was stolen. Other officers saw him at the distribution location holding a sign and talking to Spagnola campaign staff. They soon notified superiors, and the next day officials demoted Heffernan from detective to patrol officer for his perceived "overt involvement" with the Spagnola campaign.[14] District court[edit] Heffernan sued the city, the mayor, and his superior officers under 42 U.S.C. §1983 in the federal District Court for New Jersey, claiming that his rights of freedom of speech as well as freedom of association had been violated.[15] Heffernan contended that while he had not actually engaged in any protected speech, the department acted on the belief that he had, and the department should not have demoted him on the basis of that erroneous belief.[14] In 2009, a jury found for Heffernan and awarded him damages from the police officials and the city. Despite the verdict, Heffernan sought a retrial because Judge Peter G. Sheridan had not allowed him to pursue the freedom of speech claim; the defense did so as well because Judge Sheridan had allowed the freedom of association claim. While considering these motions, Judge Sheridan became aware of a conflict of interest through a former law firm and set aside the verdict, setting a new date for trial before Judge Dennis M. Cavanaugh.[16] Judge Cavanaugh granted summary judgment to the defendants on the freedom of speech claim based on their earlier motions, holding that Heffernan had not engaged in protected speech so his rights could not have been violated. In 2012, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals reversed Judge Cavanaugh's ruling and remanded the case to him with instructions that he was to allow Heffernan to present his freedom of association claim and consider the facts from the jury trial when reconsidering the summary-judgment motions.[16] Judge Kevin McNulty heard the case on remand. After considering the parties' motions for summary judgment again, he ruled in the city's favor in 2014. Heffernan, he ruled, had not engaged in any protected speech or expressive conduct. Judge McNulty also ruled that Heffernan could not prevail on claims that his perceived speech was protected, per Ambrose v. Robinson Township, a previous case on that issue in the Third Circuit,[17] or that his actions were protected since they aided and abetted speech.[18] Judge McNulty also rejected similar claims for freedom of association. He decided that Dye v. Office of the Racing Commission, a case in which the Sixth Circuit had held that the First Amendment reached perceived political association,[19] was not a precedent he could rely on since Dye itself explicitly rejected Ambrose, and as a district judge he could not reject circuit precedent.[20] Court of Appeals[edit] On appeal to the Third Circuit, a three-judge panel of Judge Robert Cowen, Judge Morton Ira Greenberg and Judge Thomas I. Vanaskie unanimously held for the city.[1] In a decision issued in 2015, Judge Vanaskie, writing for the Court, reiterated Judge McNulty's finding that Heffernan's actions in picking up the sign for his mother did not constitute protected speech or association. He distinguished the case at hand from the Sixth Circuit's ruling in Dye by noting that in that case, the employers had inferred the employees' intent from their non-participation in partisan politics rather than an actual action they had taken, as had occurred in Heffernan's case.[1] Judge Vanaskie instead found guidance from the Supreme Court's 1994 holding in Waters v. Churchill, in which it had upheld an Illinois public hospital's dismissal of a nurse for her comments about a supervisor to a colleague, despite an ongoing factual dispute about the substance of those comments. The Court found that the hospital administration had made a reasonable attempt to investigate what the nurse had said before firing her. In that case, the Court had said explicitly that disciplining employees for things they did not actually do did not rise to the level of a constitutional violation.[1] Supreme Court[edit] Following the Third Circuit's decision, Heffernan petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari, requesting they hear the case. After the Court considered both Heffernan's petition and the city's reply, it granted the petition on the first day of the 2015 term. Both parties consented to the filing of amicus curiae briefs by uninvolved parties who believed they had a stake in the outcome of the case. The National Association of Government Employees, Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, and Thomas Jefferson Center for the Protection of Free Expression filed amicus briefs in support of Heffernan, while the New Jersey State League of Municipalities and the National Conference of State Legislatures filed briefs in support of the City of Paterson.[21] The United States government also filed an amicus brief in support of Heffernan, as well as a motion to appear at oral argument, which the Court granted, meaning the Solicitor General's office would be appearing at oral arguments, held on January 19, 2016.[22] Oral arguments[edit] External video Heffernan v. City of Paterson Oral Argument, C-SPAN[23] Mark Frost, arguing for petitioner Jeffrey Heffernan, was immediately met with questions from the justices: Anthony Kennedy asked for clarification on the particular right to be protected, and Antonin Scalia, Samuel Alito and Chief Justice John Roberts all questioned him about whether his rights could be infringed if he was not actually engaged in any speech.[24] Justice Scalia (who died before the decision was announced) argued that there was "no constitutional right not to be fired for the wrong reason."[25] Frost responded that the motives of the government, rather than the actions of the individual, were important in this case. Assistant to the Solicitor General Ginger Anders, arguing on behalf of the United States as amicus curiae in favor of Heffernan, continued this argument, stating that there is "a First Amendment right not to have adverse action taken against him by his employer for the unconstitutional purpose of suppressing disfavored political beliefs."[25] Arguing for respondents, Thomas Goldstein distinguished between political neutrality and political apathy. He argued that the First Amendment protects political neutrality, the conscious choice to not take a position, but does not protect political apathy, when a person simply does not care and makes no particular choice to be neutral.[24] As Heffernan claimed that he had no affiliation with Spagnola, the respondents argued that Heffernan's actions constitute unprotected apathy rather than a conscious choice of neutrality.[26] Justice Elena Kagan questioned Goldstein as to the purpose of the First Amendment saying, "the idea has to do with why the government acted" to which he responded, "It's called an individual right, not a government wrong."[25] Frost took a rebuttal to respond to Goldstein's distinction between political neutrality and apathy, arguing that there is little distinction as the government is acting for impermissible reasons in both cases.[24] Opinion of the Court[edit] Justice Stephen Breyer delivered the opinion of the Court. In a 6–2 decision authored by Justice Stephen Breyer, the Court reversed the ruling of the lower court and ruled that the employer's motive is material to First Amendment challenges. Citing Waters v. Churchill, Justice Breyer wrote, [W]e conclude that, as in Waters, the government's reason for demoting Heffernan is what counts here. When an employer demotes an employee out of a desire to prevent the employee from engaging in political activity that the First Amendment protects, the employee is entitled to challenge that unlawful action under the First Amendment ... —even if, as here, the employer makes a factual mistake about the employee's behavior.[27] The Court remanded the case to the Third Circuit and made clear in its opinion that, while it is impermissible to retaliate based upon perceived protected speech, the lower courts should take into consideration whether Heffernan was disciplined for violating any different and neutral policies.[28] The majority provided three main arguments in support of its reasoning: that their interpretation is more in line with the text of the First Amendment, that it better served the First Amendment's purpose of limiting political patronage, and that such an interpretation will not significantly burden employers.[29] Justice Breyer argued that unlike the Fourteenth Amendment, which focuses on the rights of the people, the First Amendment focuses on the actions of the government when it says, "Congress shall make no law ... abridging the freedom of speech."[30] As the text of the amendment focuses on the government's abilities to make laws, it is the government's actions and motives, not the actual actions of citizens, which are proscribed by the Amendment. While the policy at issue was not a law of Congress, the actions were still that of a government official that infringed upon rights guaranteed by the First Amendment.[27] The Court supported this interpretation by recognizing that the First Amendment sought to prevent government actions from discouraging protected activity.[31] Citing Branti v. Finkel, the Court pointed out that precedent never required plaintiffs in political affiliation cases to show change in allegiance to be successful, and similarly extended that logic to this case: the potential chilling effect on constitutionally protected speech still exists, regardless of the factual basis of the employer's reasoning.[32] Because employees thinking of engaging in protected activity will be equally dissuaded by an incorrect dismissal as by a correct dismissal, both reasonings should be considered in violation of the First Amendment.[33] Respondents argued that finding employers liable for factual mistakes would place substantial costs upon employers.[33] The Court rejected this argument, saying that an employee would still need to prove the employer acted out of an improper motive. Referring to Heffernan's case and those like it, the Court said that "the employee will, if anything, find it more difficult to prove that motive, for the employee will have to point to more than his own conduct to show an employer's intent".[33] Dissent[edit] Justice Thomas authored the dissent. Justice Clarence Thomas authored the dissent, in which Justice Samuel Alito joined. Justice Thomas argued that the previous ruling should have been upheld "because federal law does not provide a cause of action to plaintiffs whose constitutional rights have not been violated".[34] The dissent focused on the text of the statute Heffernan was suing under: 42 U.S.C. § 1983. The statute provides a cause of action only for those whose rights have actually been violated by the government. Because Heffernan maintained that he had not been exercising his First Amendment rights, the dissent argued that those rights could not have been violated, and that a section 1983 claim requires that the employee engage in protected activity and that the employer retaliate against that activity.[35] The dissent argued that, for a section 1983 claim to be valid, "harm alone is not enough; it has to be the right kind of harm."[36] Thomas provided an example of a law allowing police to pull over any driver without cause. This would obviously violate the Fourth Amendment rights of anyone stopped, but people stuck in traffic who were injured by the collateral damage of unconstitutional actions would not be able to sue because none of their rights was violated. Similarly, it is not enough for Heffernan to have shown injury but violation of an actual right as well. For the dissent, even if the dismissal was for the wrong reason and harm was suffered, the dismissal cannot infringe upon rights he never exercised.[37] Further supporting their argument, the dissent cited Monterey v. Del Monte Dunes at Monterey, Ltd. to argue that a Section 1983 claim falls under tort law, in order to draw a distinction between how attempts are handled under tort and criminal law. Under criminal law, a factually impossible attempt to commit a crime, such as trying to steal from an empty pocket or defraud someone with no money, can still be tried as an attempt. No such doctrine exists in tort law. Because Heffernan was not engaged in protected activity, the police department could only have attempted to deprive him of his right, so his suit must fail because "there are no attempted torts."[38] Commentary[edit] The day after oral arguments, writer Gilad Edelman criticized the Court's assumption that Heffernan never exercised his First Amendment rights, saying, "the Supreme Court may miss an opportunity to make sure that cases like his really are rare."[39] Edelman interpreted Heffernan's actions as being well within the existing First Amendment precedent. Though Heffernan was not necessarily supporting the candidate, he was talking and associating with people connected to the candidate, actions already protected under existing precedent. Edelman suggested that, regardless of whether or not Heffernan intended to be identified as supporting the campaign, he was still punished by the city for associating.[39] Soon after the ruling was announced, the decision was largely praised. Jonathan Stahl, a writer at the Constitution Daily, said that "[t]he potential impact of this case on our understanding of the First Amendment is notable."[40] Similarly, The Economist called it "good law" and a "significant development" for expanding the existing jurisprudence to perceived speech, not just actual speech.[41] Aftermath[edit] Subsequent to the Supreme Court's ruling, the City of Paterson approved a $1.6 million settlement payout to Heffernan. The final payment of the settlement is due on September 30, 2017.[42] See also[edit] Freedom of speech portal New Jersey portal Supreme Court of the United States portal US labor law Spoils system 2015 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 578 References[edit] ^ a b c d e Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 777 F.3d 147, 149 (3rd Cir., 2015). Hereafter distinguished as Heffernan III. ^ NAACP v. Alabama, 357 U.S. 499 (1958). ^ Incorporation Doctrine, Cornell University Law School, (last visited June 20, 2016). ^ Allen Trelease, White Terror: The Ku Klux Klan Conspiracy and Southern Reconstruction 387-388 (1971). ^ 42 U.S.C. § 1983. ^ Karen M. Blum & Kathryn R. Urbonya, Section 1983 Litigation (1998) ^ Monroe v. Pape, 365 U.S. 167 (1961). ^ a b Elrod v. Burns, 427 U.S. 347 (1976). ^ Pickering v. Board of Education, 391 U.S. 563 (1968). ^ Waters v. Churchill, 511 U.S. 661, 671 (1994). ^ David Hudson, Balancing Act: Public Employees and Free Speech, 3 First Reports 23 (2002). ^ Waters v. Churchill, at 679–681. ^ Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 2 F.Supp.3d 563, 566 (D.N.J., 2014). Hereafter distinguished as Heffernan II. ^ a b Heffernan v. City of Paterson, No. 14-1280, 578 U.S. ___, slip op. at 2 (2016). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 2–3. ^ a b Heffernan II, at 568 (citing the earlier 2012 decision). ^ Ambrose v. Robinson Township, 303 F. 3d 488 (3rd Cir., 2002). ^ Heffernan II, 570–76. ^ Dye v. Office of the Racing Commission, 702 F.3d 286 (6th Cir. 2012). ^ Heffernan II, 579–581. ^ Amicus curiae briefs in support of petitioners: Brief for the National Association of Government Employees as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Nov. 16, 2015). Brief for the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Nov. 23, 2015). Brief for the Thomas Jefferson Center for the Protection of Free Expression, et al. as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Nov. 23, 2015). Amicus briefs in support of respondents: Brief for the New Jersey State League of Municipalities as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Dec. 23, 2015). Brief for the National Conference of State Legislatures, et al. as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Dec. 23, 2015). ^ No. 14-1280, United States Supreme Court (Apr. 29, 2016). ^ "Heffernan v. City of Paterson Oral Argument". C-SPAN. January 19, 2016. Retrieved April 19, 2017.  ^ a b c Howard Wasserman, Argument analysis: The First Amendment, political inactivity, and improper government motive, SCOTUSblog (Jan. 20, 2016). ^ a b c Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 578 U.S. ___ (2016) (Oral Arguments). ^ Transcript of Oral Argument at 31, Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 578 US ___ (2016) ^ a b Heffernan, slip op. at 6. ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 8. ^ Howard Wasserman, Opinion analysis: Improper motive can violate the First Amendment, even with a factual mistake, SCOTUSblog (Apr. 26, 2016). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6 (citing U.S. Const. amend. I) (internal quotations omitted). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6–7 ("The constitutional harm at issue in the ordinary [free speech] case consists in large part of discouraging employees—both the employee discharged (or demoted) and his or her colleagues—from engaging in protected activities."). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6–7 (citing Branti v. Finkel, 445 U.S. 507, 517). ^ a b c Heffernan, slip op. at 7. ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 1 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 2–4 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 5 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 4 (Thomas, J., dissenting) citing United States v. Stefonek, 179 F. 3d (7th Cir. 1999). . ^ a b Gilad Edelman, Heffernan v. Paterson and an Absurd First Amendment Doctrine, The New Yorker (Jan. 20, 2016). ^ Jonathan Stahl, Supreme Court rules on political speech and the First Amendment, National Constitution Center (Apr. 29, 2016). ^ S. M., Why freedom of speech might protect you when you aren't speaking, The Economist (Apr. 29, 2016). ^ Malinconico, Joe (October 19, 2016). "In a reversal, Paterson council OKs $1.6M settlement lawsuit that went to U.S. Supreme Court". North Jersey.com. Retrieved April 25, 2017.  v t e United States First Amendment case law Establishment Clause Public funding Everson v. Board of Education (1947) McCollum v. Board of Education (1948) Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York (1970) Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971) Tilton v. Richardson (1971) Committee for Public Education & Religious Liberty v. Nyquist (1973) Sloan v. Lemon (1973) Wolman v. Walter (1977) Marsh v. Chambers (1983) Mueller v. Allen (1983) Aguilar v. Felton (1985) Board of Education of Kiryas Joel Village School District v. Grumet (1994) Agostini v. Felton (1997) Mitchell v. Helms (2000) Zelman v. Simmons-Harris (2002) Locke v. Davey (2004) Arizona Christian School Tuition Organization v. Winn (2011) Public displays Stone v. Graham (1980) Lynch v. Donnelly (1984) Board of Trustees of Scarsdale v. McCreary (1985) County of Allegheny v. ACLU (1989) McCreary County v. ACLU of Kentucky (2005) Van Orden v. Perry (2005) Pleasant Grove City v. Summum (2009) School prayer Zorach v. Clauson (1952) Engel v. Vitale (1962) Abington School District v. Schempp (1963) Stone v. Graham (1980) Wallace v. Jaffree (1985) Lee v. Weisman (1992) Santa Fe Independent School District v. Doe (2000) Elk Grove Unified School District v. Newdow (2004) Creationism Epperson v. Arkansas (1968) Edwards v. Aguillard (1987) Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District (M.D. Pa. 2005) Legislature prayer Marsh v. Chambers (1983) Town of Greece v. Galloway (2014) Establishment Clause, Other McGowan v. Maryland (1961) Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York (1970) McDaniel v. Paty (1978) Widmar v. Vincent (1981) Larkin v. Grendel's Den, Inc. (1982) Estate of Thornton v. Caldor, Inc. (1985) Texas Monthly, Inc. v. Bullock (1989) Free Exercise Clause Vidal v. Girard's Executors (1844) Reynolds v. United States (1879) Davis v. Beason (1890) Schneider v. New Jersey (1939) Cantwell v. Connecticut (1940) Minersville School District v. Gobitis (1940) Murdock v. Pennsylvania (1943) United State v. Ballard (1944) Braunfeld v. Brown (1961) Torcaso v. Watkins (1961) Sherbert v. Verner (1963) Presbyterian Church v. Hull Church (1969) Wisconsin v. Yoder (1972) NLRB v. Catholic Bishop of Chicago (1979) Harris v. McRae (1980) Thomas v. Review Board of the Indiana Employment Security Division (1981) United States v. Lee (1982) Bob Jones University v. United States (1983) Bowen v. Roy (1986) Goldman v. Weinberger (1986) Employment Division v. Smith (1990) Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah (1993) City of Boerne v. Flores (1997) Watchtower Society v. Village of Stratton (2002) Cutter v. Wilkinson (2005) Gonzales v. UDV (2006) Freedom of speech (portal) Sedition and imminent danger Alien and Sedition Acts (1798) Masses Publishing Co. v. Patten (S.D.N.Y. 1917) Schenck v. United States (1919) Abrams v. United States (1919) Gitlow v. New York (1925) Whitney v. California (1927) Dennis v. United States (1951) Communist Party v. Subversive Activities Control Board (1955, 1961) Yates v. United States (1957) Bond v. Floyd (1966) Brandenburg v. Ohio (1969) False speech Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc. (1974) United States v. Alvarez (2012) Fighting words and the heckler's veto Cantwell v. Connecticut (1940) Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire (1942) Terminiello v. Chicago (1949) Feiner v. New York (1951) Gregory v. Chicago (1969) National Socialist Party of America v. Village of Skokie (1977) R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul (1992) Snyder v. Phelps (2011) Elonis v. United States (2015) Freedom of assembly and public forums Hague v. CIO (1939) Schneider v. New Jersey (1939) Martin v. Struthers (1943) Marsh v. Alabama (1946) Niemotko v. Maryland (1951) Edwards v. South Carolina (1963) Cox v. Louisiana (1965) Brown v. Louisiana (1966) Adderley v. Florida (1966) Carroll v. Town of Princess Anne (1968) Coates v. Cincinnati (1971) Organization for a Better Austin v. Keefe (1971) Lloyd Corp. v. Tanner (1972) Pruneyard Shopping Center v. Robins (1980) Widmar v. Vincent (1981) Hill v. Colorado (2000) McCullen v. Coakley (2014) Symbolic speech Stromberg v. California (1931) United States v. O'Brien (1968) Cohen v. California (1971) Smith v. Goguen (1974) Texas v. Johnson (1989) United States v. Eichman (1990) Virginia v. Black (2003) Compelled speech Minersville School District v. Gobitis (1940) West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette (1943) Wooley v. Maynard (1977) Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System v. Southworth (2000) Davenport v. Washington Education Association (2007) Knox v. Service Employees International Union, Local 1000 (2012) Agency for International Development v. Alliance for Open Society International, Inc. (2013) Loyalty oaths American Communications Association v. Douds (1950) Garner v. Board of Public Works (1951) Speiser v. Randall (1958) Keyishian v. Board of Regents (1965) Communist Party of Indiana v. Whitcomb (1974) School speech Minersville School District v. Gobitis (1940) West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette (1943) Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District (1969) Island Trees School District v. Pico (1982) Bethel School District v. Fraser (1986) Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier (1988) Rosenberger v. University of Virginia (1995) Morse v. Frederick (2007) Obscenity Rosen v. United States (1896) United States v. One Book Called Ulysses (S.D.N.Y. 1933) Roth v. United States (1957) One, Inc. v. Olesen (1958) Marcus v. Search Warrant (1961) MANual Enterprises v. Day (1962) Jacobellis v. Ohio (1964) Quantity of Books v. Kansas (1964) Freedman v. Maryland (1965) Memoirs v. Massachusetts (1966) Redrup v. New York (1967) Ginsberg v. New York (1968) Stanley v. Georgia (1969) Cohen v. California (1971) United States v. Thirty-seven Photographs (1971) Kois v. Wisconsin (1972) Miller v. California (1973) Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton (1973) United States v. 12 200-ft. Reels of Film (1973) Jenkins v. Georgia (1974) Erznoznik v. City of Jacksonville (1975) Young v. American Mini Theatres (1976) New York v. Ferber (1982) American Booksellers v. Hudnut (7th Cir., 1985) Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc. (1986) Osborne v. Ohio (1990) United States v. X-Citement Video (1994) Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union (1997) United States v. Playboy Entertainment Group (2000) Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition (2002) Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union (2002) Nitke v. Gonzales (S.D.N.Y., 2005) United States v. Williams (2008) FCC v. Fox Televisions Stations - 2 cases (2009 and 2012) American Booksellers Foundation for Free Expression v. Strickland (6th Cir., 2009) United States v. Kilbride (9th Cir., 2009) United States v. Stevens (2010) Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association (2011) Public employees Pickering v. Board of Education (1968) Perry v. Sindermann (1972) Board of Regents of State Colleges v. Roth (1972) Mt. Healthy City School District Board of Education v. Doyle (1977) Givhan v. Western Line Consolidated School District (1979) Connick v. Myers (1983) Rankin v. McPherson (1987) Waters v. Churchill (1994) Garcetti v. Ceballos (2006) Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri (2011) Heffernan v. City of Paterson (2016) Hatch Act and similar laws Ex parte Curtis (1882) United Public Workers v. Mitchell (1947) United States Civil Service Commission v. National Association of Letter Carriers (1973) Broadrick v. Oklahoma (1973) Licensing and restriction of speech Mutual Film Corporation v. Industrial Commission of Ohio (1915) Joseph Burstyn, Inc. v. Wilson (1952) Freedman v. Maryland (1965) Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council (1976) Hoffman Estates v. The Flipside, Hoffman Estates, Inc. (1982) Walker v. Texas Division, Sons of Confederate Veterans (2015) Commercial speech Valentine v. Chrestensen (1942) Rowan v. U.S. Post Office Dept. (1970) Pittsburgh Press Co. v. Pittsburgh Commission on Human Relations (1973) Bigelow v. Commonwealth of Virginia (1974) Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council (1976) Bates v. State Bar of Arizona (1977) Linmark Associates, Inc. v. Willingboro (1977) Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Ass’n (1978) Friedman v. Rogers (1979) Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission (1980) Consol. Edison Co. v. Public Serv. Comm'n (1980) Bolger v. Youngs Drug Products (1983) Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel (1985) Pacific Gas & Electric Co. v. Public Utilities Commission of California (1986) Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto Rico (1986) San Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic Committee (1987) 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island (1996) Sorrell v. IMS Health Inc. (2011) Campaign finance and political speech Buckley v. Valeo (1976) First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti (1978) Citizens Against Rent Control v. City of Berkeley (1981) California Medical Association v. FEC (1981) Brown v. Socialist Workers '74 Campaign Committee (1982) Regan v. Taxation with Representation of Washington (1983) FEC v. National Conservative Political Action Committee (1985) FEC v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life (1986) Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce (1990) McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Commission (1995) Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Committee v. FEC (1996) Nixon v. Shrink Missouri Government PAC (2000) FEC v. Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Committee (2001) Republican Party of Minnesota v. White (2002) McConnell v. FEC (2003) FEC v. Beaumont (2003) Randall v. Sorrell (2006) FEC v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc. (2007) Davis v. FEC (2008) Citizens United v. FEC (2010) McComish v. Bennett (2011) American Tradition Partnership v. Bullock (2012) McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission (2014) Williams-Yulee v. The Florida Bar (2015) Freedom of the press Prior restraints and censorship Near v. Minnesota (1931) Lovell v. City of Griffin (1938) Hannegan v. Esquire (1946) New York Times Co. v. United States (1971) Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo (1974) Nebraska Press Assn. v. Stuart (1976) Tory v. Cochran (2005) Privacy Time, Inc. v. Hill (1967) Cox Broadcasting Corp. v. Cohn (1975) Florida Star v. B. J. F. (1989) Taxation and privileges Grosjean v. American Press Co. (1936) Branzburg v. Hayes (1972) Minneapolis Star Tribune Company v. Commissioner (1983) Defamation Beauharnais v. Illinois (1952) New York Times Co. v. Sullivan (1964) Curtis Publishing Co. v. Butts (1967) Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc. (1974) Time, Inc. v. Firestone (1976) Bose Corp. v. Consumers Union of United States, Inc. (1984) Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc. (1985) McDonald v. Smith (1985) Hustler Magazine v. Falwell (1988) Harte-Hanks Communications v. Connaughton (1989) Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co. (1990) Obsidian Finance Group, LLC v. Cox (9th Cir., 2014) Broadcast media Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC (1969) FCC v. Pacifica Foundation (1978) Turner Broadcasting v. FCC (1994) Bartnicki v. Vopper (2001) Freedom of association Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee v. McGrath (1951) Watkins v. United States (1957) NAACP v. Alabama (1958) Baggett v. Bullitt (1964) In re Primus (1978) Roberts v. United States Jaycees (1984) Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, & Bisexual Group of Boston (1995) Boy Scouts of America v. Dale (2000) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Heffernan_v._City_of_Paterson&oldid=777385770" Categories: United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court United States First Amendment case law United States public employment case law 2016 in United States case law Hidden categories: Featured articles Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Add links This page was last modified on 26 April 2017, at 21:31. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page |||Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 5,393,689 articles in English Arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From today's featured article Stephen Breyer Heffernan v. City of Paterson was a U.S. Supreme Court case concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees, decided on April 26, 2016. Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey, police force, was seen with a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor. Heffernan's supervisors mistakenly thought that he was actively supporting the challenger and demoted him. He brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his right to free speech. Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer (pictured) cited the Court's precedents, which had held that it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not actually engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed but not that his constitutional rights had been violated. (Full article...) Recently featured: George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore "The Shape of Things to Come" (Lost) Shakespeare authorship question Archive By email More featured articles... Did you know... Unita Blackwell ... that civil rights activist Unita Blackwell (pictured) was the first African-American woman to be elected mayor in the state of Mississippi? ... that soldiers lined up on the sinking British troopship SS Tyndareus began to sing "It's a Long Way to Tipperary" while waiting for orders? ... that many reviewers compared the superhero comic Ultra to the television series Sex and the City? ... that the recently named fossil egg Suchoolithus dates to the Late Jurassic, making it tied for the oldest-known crocodylomorph egg? ... that the film The Brainwashing of My Dad received funding from Kickstarter? ... that the term elastance, the inverse of capacitance, was coined by Oliver Heaviside to promote an analogy of a capacitor as a spring rather than a container of charge? ... that "Christ ist erstanden", an old German hymn mentioned as early as the 12th century, was set for choir in the 21st century? ... that despite topping his class at Sandhurst, John Gellibrand found the prospects for promotion in the British Army so bleak that he resigned his commission and moved to Tasmania to grow apples? Recent additions Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru In the London Marathon, Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru (pictured) win the women's and men's races, respectively. A Taliban attack on an Afghan National Army base kills 140 soldiers. Turkey votes in a constitutional referendum in favour of replacing its parliamentary system of government with an executive presidency. A suicide bombing of civilian evacuation buses near Aleppo, Syria, kills more than 120 people, including at least 80 children. Emma Morano, the last known living person born before 1900, dies at the age of 117. Ongoing: Battle of Mosul Recent deaths: Erin Moran Michele Scarponi Ugo Ehiogu Aaron Hernandez On this day... April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries Today's featured picture The Storm is a painting by French artist Pierre Auguste Cot completed in 1880. Currently on display at New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art, it was commissioned by Catharine Lorillard Wolfe. Suggested inspirations have included the Greek romance Daphnis and Chloe by Longus as well as the romantic tale Paul et Virginie by Bernardin de Saint-Pierre. Painting: Pierre Auguste Cot Recently featured: Charolais bull Jesse B. Jackson Dynjandi Archive More featured pictures... Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning materials and activities Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 5,393,689 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=762066868" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Main Page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Languages ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Galego ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Român? ??????? Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? This page was last modified on 26 January 2017, at 12:39. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page#mw-head |||Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 5,393,689 articles in English Arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From today's featured article Stephen Breyer Heffernan v. City of Paterson was a U.S. Supreme Court case concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees, decided on April 26, 2016. Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey, police force, was seen with a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor. Heffernan's supervisors mistakenly thought that he was actively supporting the challenger and demoted him. He brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his right to free speech. Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer (pictured) cited the Court's precedents, which had held that it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not actually engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed but not that his constitutional rights had been violated. (Full article...) Recently featured: George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore "The Shape of Things to Come" (Lost) Shakespeare authorship question Archive By email More featured articles... Did you know... Unita Blackwell ... that civil rights activist Unita Blackwell (pictured) was the first African-American woman to be elected mayor in the state of Mississippi? ... that soldiers lined up on the sinking British troopship SS Tyndareus began to sing "It's a Long Way to Tipperary" while waiting for orders? ... that many reviewers compared the superhero comic Ultra to the television series Sex and the City? ... that the recently named fossil egg Suchoolithus dates to the Late Jurassic, making it tied for the oldest-known crocodylomorph egg? ... that the film The Brainwashing of My Dad received funding from Kickstarter? ... that the term elastance, the inverse of capacitance, was coined by Oliver Heaviside to promote an analogy of a capacitor as a spring rather than a container of charge? ... that "Christ ist erstanden", an old German hymn mentioned as early as the 12th century, was set for choir in the 21st century? ... that despite topping his class at Sandhurst, John Gellibrand found the prospects for promotion in the British Army so bleak that he resigned his commission and moved to Tasmania to grow apples? Recent additions Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru In the London Marathon, Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru (pictured) win the women's and men's races, respectively. A Taliban attack on an Afghan National Army base kills 140 soldiers. Turkey votes in a constitutional referendum in favour of replacing its parliamentary system of government with an executive presidency. A suicide bombing of civilian evacuation buses near Aleppo, Syria, kills more than 120 people, including at least 80 children. Emma Morano, the last known living person born before 1900, dies at the age of 117. Ongoing: Battle of Mosul Recent deaths: Erin Moran Michele Scarponi Ugo Ehiogu Aaron Hernandez On this day... April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries Today's featured picture The Storm is a painting by French artist Pierre Auguste Cot completed in 1880. Currently on display at New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art, it was commissioned by Catharine Lorillard Wolfe. Suggested inspirations have included the Greek romance Daphnis and Chloe by Longus as well as the romantic tale Paul et Virginie by Bernardin de Saint-Pierre. Painting: Pierre Auguste Cot Recently featured: Charolais bull Jesse B. Jackson Dynjandi Archive More featured pictures... Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning materials and activities Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 5,393,689 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=762066868" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Main Page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Languages ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Galego ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Român? ??????? Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? This page was last modified on 26 January 2017, at 12:39. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page#p-search |||Main Page From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 5,393,689 articles in English Arts Biography Geography History Mathematics Science Society Technology All portals From today's featured article Stephen Breyer Heffernan v. City of Paterson was a U.S. Supreme Court case concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees, decided on April 26, 2016. Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey, police force, was seen with a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor. Heffernan's supervisors mistakenly thought that he was actively supporting the challenger and demoted him. He brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his right to free speech. Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer (pictured) cited the Court's precedents, which had held that it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not actually engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed but not that his constitutional rights had been violated. (Full article...) Recently featured: George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore "The Shape of Things to Come" (Lost) Shakespeare authorship question Archive By email More featured articles... Did you know... Unita Blackwell ... that civil rights activist Unita Blackwell (pictured) was the first African-American woman to be elected mayor in the state of Mississippi? ... that soldiers lined up on the sinking British troopship SS Tyndareus began to sing "It's a Long Way to Tipperary" while waiting for orders? ... that many reviewers compared the superhero comic Ultra to the television series Sex and the City? ... that the recently named fossil egg Suchoolithus dates to the Late Jurassic, making it tied for the oldest-known crocodylomorph egg? ... that the film The Brainwashing of My Dad received funding from Kickstarter? ... that the term elastance, the inverse of capacitance, was coined by Oliver Heaviside to promote an analogy of a capacitor as a spring rather than a container of charge? ... that "Christ ist erstanden", an old German hymn mentioned as early as the 12th century, was set for choir in the 21st century? ... that despite topping his class at Sandhurst, John Gellibrand found the prospects for promotion in the British Army so bleak that he resigned his commission and moved to Tasmania to grow apples? Recent additions Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru In the London Marathon, Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru (pictured) win the women's and men's races, respectively. A Taliban attack on an Afghan National Army base kills 140 soldiers. Turkey votes in a constitutional referendum in favour of replacing its parliamentary system of government with an executive presidency. A suicide bombing of civilian evacuation buses near Aleppo, Syria, kills more than 120 people, including at least 80 children. Emma Morano, the last known living person born before 1900, dies at the age of 117. Ongoing: Battle of Mosul Recent deaths: Erin Moran Michele Scarponi Ugo Ehiogu Aaron Hernandez On this day... April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries Today's featured picture The Storm is a painting by French artist Pierre Auguste Cot completed in 1880. Currently on display at New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art, it was commissioned by Catharine Lorillard Wolfe. Suggested inspirations have included the Greek romance Daphnis and Chloe by Longus as well as the romantic tale Paul et Virginie by Bernardin de Saint-Pierre. Painting: Pierre Auguste Cot Recently featured: Charolais bull Jesse B. Jackson Dynjandi Archive More featured pictures... Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas. Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia. Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English. Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects. Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation. Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning materials and activities Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 5,393,689 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=762066868" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Main Page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Languages ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Galego ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Român? ??????? Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? This page was last modified on 26 January 2017, at 12:39. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia |||Wikipedia From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article is about the Internet encyclopedia. For Wikipedia's home page, see Wikipedia's Main Page. For Wikipedia's visitor introduction, see Wikipedia's About Page. For other uses, see Wikipedia (disambiguation). Wikipedia The logo of Wikipedia, a globe featuring glyphs from several writing systems[notes 1] Screenshot  Main Page of the English Wikipedia on April 6, 2017 Type of site Internet encyclopedia Available in 295 languages Owner Wikimedia Foundation Created by Jimmy Wales, Larry Sanger[1] Slogan(s) The free encyclopedia that anyone can edit Website wikipedia.org Alexa rank 5 (Global, April 2017[update]) Commercial No Registration Optional[notes 2] Users >312,808 active users[notes 3] and >67,527,543 registered users Launched January 15, 2001; 16 years ago (2001-01-15) Current status Active Content license CC Attribution / Share-Alike 3.0 Most text is also dual-licensed under GFDL; media licensing varies Written in LAMP platform[2] OCLC number 52075003 Wikipedia (i/?w?k??pi?di?/ or i/?w?ki?pi?di?/ WIK-i-PEE-dee-?) is a free online encyclopedia with the aim to allow anyone to edit articles.[3] Wikipedia is the largest and most popular general reference work on the Internet[4][5][6] and is ranked among the ten most popular websites.[7] Wikipedia is owned by the nonprofit Wikimedia Foundation.[8][9][10] Wikipedia was launched on January 15, 2001, by Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger.[11] Sanger coined its name,[12][13] a portmanteau of wiki[notes 4] and encyclopedia. There was only the English language version initially, but it quickly developed similar versions in other languages, which differ in content and in editing practices. With 5,393,611 articles,[notes 5] the English Wikipedia is the largest of the more than 290 Wikipedia encyclopedias. Overall, Wikipedia consists of more than 40 million articles in more than 250 different languages[15] and, as of February 2014[update], it had 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors each month.[16] As of March 2017, Wikipedia has about forty thousand high-quality articles known as Featured Articles and Good Articles that cover vital topics.[17][18] In 2005, Nature published a peer review comparing 42 science articles from Encyclopædia Britannica and Wikipedia, and found that Wikipedia's level of accuracy approached Encyclopædia Britannica's.[19] Criticism of Wikipedia includes claims that it exhibits systemic bias, presents a mixture of "truths, half truths, and some falsehoods",[20] and that, in controversial topics, it is subject to manipulation and spin.[21] Contents 1 History 1.1 Nupedia 1.2 Launch and early growth 1.3 Milestones 2 Openness 2.1 Restrictions 2.2 Review of changes 2.3 Vandalism 3 Policies and laws 3.1 Content policies and guidelines 4 Governance 4.1 Administrators 4.2 Dispute resolution 4.2.1 Arbitration Committee 5 Community 5.1 Diversity 6 Language editions 7 Critical reception 7.1 Accuracy of content 7.1.1 Medical information 7.2 Quality of writing 7.3 Coverage of topics and systemic bias 7.3.1 Coverage of topics and selection bias 7.3.2 Systemic bias 7.3.3 Identifying the filter-bubble problem 7.4 Explicit content 7.5 Privacy 7.6 Sexism 8 Operation 8.1 Wikimedia Foundation and Wikimedia movement affiliates 8.2 Software operations and support 8.3 Automated editing 8.4 Wikiprojects, and assessments of articles' importance and quality 8.5 Hardware operations and support 8.6 Internal research and operational development 8.7 Internal news publications 9 Access to content 9.1 Content licensing 9.2 Methods of access 9.2.1 Mobile access 10 Cultural impact 10.1 Readership 10.2 Cultural significance 10.2.1 Awards 10.2.2 Satire 10.3 Sister projects – Wikimedia 10.4 Publishing 10.5 Scientific use 11 Related projects 12 See also 13 References 13.1 Notes 14 Further reading 14.1 Academic studies 14.2 Books 14.3 Book reviews and other articles 14.3.1 Learning resources 14.3.2 Other media coverage 15 External links History Main article: History of Wikipedia Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger Nupedia Wikipedia originally developed from another encyclopedia project called Nupedia Other collaborative online encyclopedias were attempted before Wikipedia, but none were so successful.[22] Wikipedia began as a complementary project for Nupedia, a free online English-language encyclopedia project whose articles were written by experts and reviewed under a formal process.[11] Nupedia was founded on March 9, 2000, under the ownership of Bomis, a web portal company. Its main figures were Jimmy Wales, the CEO of Bomis, and Larry Sanger, editor-in-chief for Nupedia and later Wikipedia. Nupedia was licensed initially under its own Nupedia Open Content License, switching to the GNU Free Documentation License before Wikipedia's founding at the urging of Richard Stallman.[23] Sanger and Wales founded Wikipedia.[24][25] While Wales is credited with defining the goal of making a publicly editable encyclopedia,[26][27] Sanger is credited with the strategy of using a wiki to reach that goal.[28] On January 10, 2001, Sanger proposed on the Nupedia mailing list to create a wiki as a "feeder" project for Nupedia.[29] Play media Wikipedia according to Simpleshow External audio The Great Book of Knowledge, Part 1, Ideas with Paul Kennedy, CBC, January 15, 2014 Launch and early growth Wikipedia was launched on January 15, 2001, as a single English-language edition at www.wikipedia.com,[30] and announced by Sanger on the Nupedia mailing list.[26] Wikipedia's policy of "neutral point-of-view"[31] was codified in its first months. Otherwise, there were relatively few rules initially and Wikipedia operated independently of Nupedia.[26] Originally, Bomis intended to make Wikipedia a business for profit.[32] Wikipedia gained early contributors from Nupedia, Slashdot postings, and web search engine indexing. By August 8, 2001, Wikipedia had over 8,000 articles.[33] On September 25, 2001, Wikipedia had over 13,000 articles.[34] By the end of 2001, it had grown to approximately 20,000 articles and 18 language editions. It had reached 26 language editions by late 2002, 46 by the end of 2003, and 161 by the final days of 2004.[35] Nupedia and Wikipedia coexisted until the former's servers were taken down permanently in 2003, and its text was incorporated into Wikipedia. The English Wikipedia passed the mark of two million articles on September 9, 2007, making it the largest encyclopedia ever assembled, surpassing even the 1408 Yongle Encyclopedia, which had held the record for almost 600 years.[36] Citing fears of commercial advertising and lack of control in Wikipedia, users of the Spanish Wikipedia forked from Wikipedia to create the Enciclopedia Libre in February 2002.[37] These moves encouraged Wales to announce that Wikipedia would not display advertisements, and to change Wikipedia's domain from wikipedia.com to wikipedia.org.[38] Though the English Wikipedia reached three million articles in August 2009, the growth of the edition, in terms of the numbers of articles and of contributors, appears to have peaked around early 2007.[39] Around 1,800 articles were added daily to the encyclopedia in 2006; by 2013 that average was roughly 800.[40] A team at the Palo Alto Research Center attributed this slowing of growth to the project's increasing exclusivity and resistance to change.[41] Others suggest that the growth is flattening naturally because articles that could be called "low-hanging fruit"—topics that clearly merit an article—have already been created and built up extensively.[42][43][44] In November 2009, a researcher at the Rey Juan Carlos University in Madrid (Spain) found that the English Wikipedia had lost 49,000 editors during the first three months of 2009; in comparison, the project lost only 4,900 editors during the same period in 2008.[45][46] The Wall Street Journal cited the array of rules applied to editing and disputes related to such content among the reasons for this trend.[47] Wales disputed these claims in 2009, denying the decline and questioning the methodology of the study.[48] Two years later, in 2011, Wales acknowledged the presence of a slight decline, noting a decrease from "a little more than 36,000 writers" in June 2010 to 35,800 in June 2011. In the same interview, Wales also claimed the number of editors was "stable and sustainable".[49] A 2013 article titled "The Decline of Wikipedia" in MIT's Technology Review questioned this claim. The article revealed that since 2007, Wikipedia had lost a third of the volunteer editors who update and correct the online encyclopedia and those still there have focused increasingly on minutiae.[50] In July 2012, the Atlantic reported that the number of administrators is also in decline.[51] In the November 25, 2013, issue of New York magazine, Katherine Ward stated "Wikipedia, the sixth-most-used website, is facing an internal crisis".[52] Wikipedia blackout protest against SOPA on January 18, 2012 Play media A promotional video of the Wikimedia Foundation that encourages viewers to edit Wikipedia, mostly reviewing 2014 via Wikipedia content Milestones In January 2007, Wikipedia entered for the first time the top-ten list of the most popular websites in the U.S., according to comScore Networks. With 42.9 million unique visitors, Wikipedia was ranked number 9, surpassing the New York Times (#10) and Apple (#11). This marked a significant increase over January 2006, when the rank was number 33, with Wikipedia receiving around 18.3 million unique visitors.[53] As of March 2015[update], Wikipedia has rank 5[7][54] among websites in terms of popularity according to Alexa Internet. In 2014, it received 8 billion pageviews every month.[55] On February 9, 2014, The New York Times reported that Wikipedia has 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors a month, "according to the ratings firm comScore."[16] On January 18, 2012, the English Wikipedia participated in a series of coordinated protests against two proposed laws in the United States Congress—the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA) and the PROTECT IP Act (PIPA)—by blacking out its pages for 24 hours.[56] More than 162 million people viewed the blackout explanation page that temporarily replaced Wikipedia content.[57][58] Loveland and Reagle argue that, in process, Wikipedia follows a long tradition of historical encyclopedias that accumulated improvements piecemeal through "stigmergic accumulation".[59][60] On January 20, 2014, Subodh Varma reporting for The Economic Times indicated that not only had Wikipedia's growth flattened but that it has "lost nearly 10 per cent of its page-views last year. That's a decline of about 2 billion between December 2012 and December 2013. Its most popular versions are leading the slide: page-views of the English Wikipedia declined by 12 per cent, those of German version slid by 17 per cent and the Japanese version lost 9 per cent."[61] Varma added that, "While Wikipedia's managers think that this could be due to errors in counting, other experts feel that Google's Knowledge Graphs project launched last year may be gobbling up Wikipedia users."[61] When contacted on this matter, Clay Shirky, associate professor at New York University and fellow at Harvard's Berkman Center for Internet and Security indicated that he suspected much of the page view decline was due to Knowledge Graphs, stating, "If you can get your question answered from the search page, you don't need to click [any further]."[61] By the end of December 2016, Wikipedia was ranked fifth in the most popular websites globally.[62] Number of Wikipedia articles[63] Wikipedia editors with >100 edits per month[63] Openness Differences between versions of an article are highlighted as shown Unlike traditional encyclopedias, Wikipedia follows the procrastination principle[notes 6][64] regarding the security of its content.[64] It started almost entirely open—anyone could create articles, and any Wikipedia article could be edited by any reader, even those who did not have a Wikipedia account. Modifications to all articles would be published immediately. As a result, any article could contain inaccuracies such as errors, ideological biases, and nonsensical or irrelevant text. Restrictions Due to the increasing popularity of Wikipedia, popular editions, including the English version, have introduced editing restrictions in some cases. For instance, on the English Wikipedia and some other language editions, only registered users may create a new article.[65] On the English Wikipedia, among others, some particularly controversial, sensitive and/or vandalism-prone pages have been protected to some degree.[66][67] A frequently vandalized article can be semi-protected or extended confirmed protected, meaning that only autoconfirmed or extended confirmed editors are able to modify it.[68] A particularly contentious article may be locked so that only administrators are able to make changes.[69] In certain cases, all editors are allowed to submit modifications, but review is required for some editors, depending on certain conditions. For example, the German Wikipedia maintains "stable versions" of articles,[70] which have passed certain reviews. Following protracted trials and community discussion, the English Wikipedia introduced the "pending changes" system in December 2012.[71] Under this system, new and unregistered users' edits to certain controversial or vandalism-prone articles are reviewed by established users before they are published.[72] The editing interface of Wikipedia Review of changes Although changes are not systematically reviewed, the software that powers Wikipedia provides certain tools allowing anyone to review changes made by others. The "History" page of each article links to each revision.[notes 7][73] On most articles, anyone can undo others' changes by clicking a link on the article's history page. Anyone can view the latest changes to articles, and anyone may maintain a "watchlist" of articles that interest them so they can be notified of any changes. "New pages patrol" is a process whereby newly created articles are checked for obvious problems.[74] In 2003, economics PhD student Andrea Ciffolilli argued that the low transaction costs of participating in a wiki create a catalyst for collaborative development, and that features such as allowing easy access to past versions of a page favor "creative construction" over "creative destruction".[75] Vandalism Main article: Vandalism on Wikipedia Any change or edit that manipulates content in a way that purposefully compromises the integrity of Wikipedia is considered vandalism. The most common and obvious types of vandalism include additions of obscenities and crude humor. Vandalism can also include advertising and other types of spam.[76] Sometimes editors commit vandalism by removing content or entirely blanking a given page. Less common types of vandalism, such as the deliberate addition of plausible but false information to an article, can be more difficult to detect. Vandals can introduce irrelevant formatting, modify page semantics such as the page's title or categorization, manipulate the underlying code of an article, or use images disruptively.[77] American journalist John Seigenthaler (1927–2014), subject of the Seigenthaler incident Obvious vandalism is generally easy to remove from Wikipedia articles; the median time to detect and fix vandalism is a few minutes.[78][79] However, some vandalism takes much longer to repair.[80] In the Seigenthaler biography incident, an anonymous editor introduced false information into the biography of American political figure John Seigenthaler in May 2005. Seigenthaler was falsely presented as a suspect in the assassination of John F. Kennedy.[80] The article remained uncorrected for four months.[80] Seigenthaler, the founding editorial director of USA Today and founder of the Freedom Forum First Amendment Center at Vanderbilt University, called Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales and asked whether he had any way of knowing who contributed the misinformation. Wales replied that he did not, although the perpetrator was eventually traced.[81][82] After the incident, Seigenthaler described Wikipedia as "a flawed and irresponsible research tool".[80] This incident led to policy changes at Wikipedia, specifically targeted at tightening up the verifiability of biographical articles of living people.[83] Policies and laws See also: Wikipedia:Five Pillars External video Wikimania, 60 Minutes, CBS, 20 minutes, April 5, 2015, co-founder Jimmy Wales at Fosdem Content in Wikipedia is subject to the laws (in particular, copyright laws) of the United States and of the U.S. state of Virginia, where the majority of Wikipedia's servers are located. Beyond legal matters, the editorial principles of Wikipedia are embodied in the "five pillars" and in numerous policies and guidelines intended to appropriately shape content. Even these rules are stored in wiki form, and Wikipedia editors write and revise the website's policies and guidelines.[84] Editors can enforce these rules by deleting or modifying non-compliant material. Originally, rules on the non-English editions of Wikipedia were based on a translation of the rules for the English Wikipedia. They have since diverged to some extent.[70] Content policies and guidelines According to the rules on the English Wikipedia, each entry in Wikipedia must be about a topic that is encyclopedic and is not a dictionary entry or dictionary-like.[85] A topic should also meet Wikipedia's standards of "notability",[86] which generally means that the topic must have been covered in mainstream media or major academic journal sources that are independent of the article's subject. Further, Wikipedia intends to convey only knowledge that is already established and recognized.[87] It must not present original research. A claim that is likely to be challenged requires a reference to a reliable source. Among Wikipedia editors, this is often phrased as "verifiability, not truth" to express the idea that the readers, not the encyclopedia, are ultimately responsible for checking the truthfulness of the articles and making their own interpretations.[88] This can at times lead to the removal of information that is valid.[89] Finally, Wikipedia must not take sides.[90] All opinions and viewpoints, if attributable to external sources, must enjoy an appropriate share of coverage within an article.[91] This is known as neutral point of view (NPOV). Governance Further information: Wikipedia:Administration Wikipedia's initial anarchy integrated democratic and hierarchical elements over time.[92][93] An article is not considered to be owned by its creator or any other editor and is not vetted by any recognized authority.[94] Wikipedia's contributors avoid a tragedy of the commons by internalizing benefits. They do this by experiencing flow and identifying with and gaining status in the Wikipedia community.[95] Administrators Editors in good standing in the community can run for one of many levels of volunteer stewardship: this begins with "administrator",[96][97] privileged users who can delete pages, prevent articles from being changed in case of vandalism or editorial disputes, and try to prevent certain persons from editing. Despite the name, administrators are not supposed to enjoy any special privilege in decision-making; instead, their powers are mostly limited to making edits that have project-wide effects and thus are disallowed to ordinary editors, and to implement restrictions intended to prevent certain persons from making disruptive edits (such as vandalism).[98][99] Fewer editors become administrators than in years past, in part because the process of vetting potential Wikipedia administrators has become more rigorous.[100] Bureaucrats name new administrators, solely upon the recommendations from the community. Dispute resolution Wikipedians often have disputes regarding content, which may result in repeatedly making opposite changes to an article, known as edit warring[101][102] Over time, Wikipedia has developed a semi-formal dispute resolution process to assist in such circumstances. In order to determine community consensus, editors can raise issues at appropriate community forums,[notes 8] or seek outside input through third opinion requests or by initiating a more general community discussion known as a request for comment. Arbitration Committee Main article: Arbitration Committee The Arbitration Committee presides over the ultimate dispute resolution process. Although disputes usually arise from a disagreement between two opposing views on how an article should read, the Arbitration Committee explicitly refuses to directly rule on the specific view that should be adopted. Statistical analyses suggest that the committee ignores the content of disputes and rather focuses on the way disputes are conducted,[103] functioning not so much to resolve disputes and make peace between conflicting editors, but to weed out problematic editors while allowing potentially productive editors back in to participate. Therefore, the committee does not dictate the content of articles, although it sometimes condemns content changes when it deems the new content violates Wikipedia policies (for example, if the new content is considered biased). Its remedies include cautions and probations (used in 63% of cases) and banning editors from articles (43%), subject matters (23%) or Wikipedia (16%). Complete bans from Wikipedia are generally limited to instances of impersonation and anti-social behavior. When conduct is not impersonation or anti-social, but rather anti-consensus or in violation of editing policies, remedies tend to be limited to warnings.[104] Community Main article: Wikipedia community Play media Video of Wikimania 2005 – an annual conference for users of Wikipedia and other projects operated by the Wikimedia Foundation, was held in Frankfurt am Main, Germany from August 4 to 8. Each article and each user of Wikipedia has an associated "Talk" page. These form the primary communication channel for editors to discuss, coordinate and debate.[105] Play media Wikipedians and British Museum curators collaborate on the article Hoxne Hoard in June 2010 Wikipedia's community has been described as cult-like,[106] although not always with entirely negative connotations.[107] The project's preference for cohesiveness, even if it requires compromise that includes disregard of credentials, has been referred to as "anti-elitism".[108] Wikipedians sometimes award one another virtual barnstars for good work. These personalized tokens of appreciation reveal a wide range of valued work extending far beyond simple editing to include social support, administrative actions, and types of articulation work.[109] Wikipedia does not require that its editors and contributors provide identification.[110] As Wikipedia grew, "Who writes Wikipedia?" became one of the questions frequently asked on the project.[111] Jimmy Wales once argued that only "a community ... a dedicated group of a few hundred volunteers" makes the bulk of contributions to Wikipedia and that the project is therefore "much like any traditional organization".[112] In 2008, a Slate magazine article reported that: "According to researchers in Palo Alto, 1 percent of Wikipedia users are responsible for about half of the site's edits."[113] This method of evaluating contributions was later disputed by Aaron Swartz, who noted that several articles he sampled had large portions of their content (measured by number of characters) contributed by users with low edit counts.[114] The English Wikipedia has 5,393,611 articles, 30,795,277 registered editors, and 135,691 active editors. An editor is considered active if they have made one or more edits in the past thirty days. Editors who fail to comply with Wikipedia cultural rituals, such as signing talk page comments, may implicitly signal that they are Wikipedia outsiders, increasing the odds that Wikipedia insiders may target or discount their contributions. Becoming a Wikipedia insider involves non-trivial costs: the contributor is expected to learn Wikipedia-specific technological codes, submit to a sometimes convoluted dispute resolution process, and learn a "baffling culture rich with in-jokes and insider references".[115] Editors who do not log in are in some sense second-class citizens on Wikipedia,[115] as "participants are accredited by members of the wiki community, who have a vested interest in preserving the quality of the work product, on the basis of their ongoing participation",[116] but the contribution histories of anonymous unregistered editors recognized only by their IP addresses cannot be attributed to a particular editor with certainty. A 2007 study by researchers from Dartmouth College found that "anonymous and infrequent contributors to Wikipedia […] are as reliable a source of knowledge as those contributors who register with the site".[117] Jimmy Wales stated in 2009 that "(I)t turns out over 50% of all the edits are done by just .7% of the users... 524 people... And in fact the most active 2%, which is 1400 people, have done 73.4% of all the edits."[112] However, Business Insider editor and journalist Henry Blodget showed in 2009 that in a random sample of articles, most content in Wikipedia (measured by the amount of contributed text that survives to the latest sampled edit) is created by "outsiders", while most editing and formatting is done by "insiders".[112] A 2008 study found that Wikipedians were less agreeable, open, and conscientious than others,[118][119] although a later commentary pointed out serious flaws, including that the data showed higher openness, that the differences with the control group were small as were the samples.[120] According to a 2009 study, there is "evidence of growing resistance from the Wikipedia community to new content".[121] Diversity Wikipedia editor demographics (2008) One study found that the contributor base to Wikipedia "was barely 13% women; the average age of a contributor was in the mid-20s".[122] A 2011 study by researchers from the University of Minnesota found that females comprised 16.1% of the 38,497 editors who started editing Wikipedia during 2009.[123] In a January 2011 New York Times article, Noam Cohen observed that just 13% of Wikipedia's contributors are female according to a 2008 Wikimedia Foundation survey.[124] Sue Gardner, a former executive director of the Wikimedia Foundation, hoped to see female contributions increase to 25% by 2015.[125] Linda Basch, president of the National Council for Research on Women, noted the contrast in these Wikipedia editor statistics with the percentage of women currently completing bachelor's degrees, master's degrees and PhD programs in the United States (all at rates of 50 percent or greater).[126] In response, various universities have hosted edit-a-thons to encourage more women to participate in the Wikipedia community. In fall 2013, 15 colleges and universities — including Yale, Brown, and Pennsylvania State — offered college credit for students to "write feminist thinking" about technology into Wikipedia.[127] Estimates of the diversity of contributors by educational level have indicated that sixty-two percent of Wikipedia's editors are at the high school and undergraduate college level of education.[128] In August 2014, Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales said in a BBC interview that the Wikimedia Foundation was "... really doubling down our efforts ..." to reach 25% of female editors (originally targeted by 2015), since the Foundation had "totally failed" so far. Wales said "a lot of things need to happen ... a lot of outreach, a lot of software changes".[129] Andrew Lih, writing in The New York Times, was quoted by Bloomberg News in December 2016 as supporting Wales comments concerning shortfalls in Wikipedia's outreach to female editors. Lih states his concern with the question indicating that: "How can you get people to participate in an (editing) environment that feels unsafe, where identifying yourself as a woman, as a feminist, could open you up to ugly, intimidating behavior".[130] Language editions There are currently 295 language editions of Wikipedia (also called language versions, or simply Wikipedias). Thirteen of these have over one million articles each (English, Swedish, Cebuano, German, Dutch, French, Russian, Italian, Spanish, Waray-Waray, Polish, Vietnamese and Japanese), five more have over 500,000 articles (Portuguese, Chinese, Ukrainian, Catalan and Persian), 40 more have over 100,000 articles, and 77 more have over 10,000 articles.[131][132] The largest, the English Wikipedia, has over 5.3 million articles. As of January 2017[update], according to Alexa, the English subdomain (en.wikipedia.org; English Wikipedia) receives approximately 55% of Wikipedia's cumulative traffic, with the remaining split among the other languages (Russian: 9%; Japanese: 7%; Spanish: 6%; French: 4%).[7] As of April 2017, the six largest language editions are (in order of article count) the English, Cebuano, Swedish, German, Dutch, and French Wikipedias.[133] Distribution of the 44,160,825 articles in different language editions (as of 26 April 2017)[134]   English (12.2%)   Cebuano (9.4%)   Swedish (8.6%)   German (4.6%)   Dutch (4.3%)   French (4.2%)   Russian (3.1%)   Italian (3%)   Spanish (3%)   Waray (2.9%)   Polish (2.8%)   Vietnamese (2.6%)   Japanese (2.4%)   Portuguese (2.2%)   Other (34.7%) Logarithmic graph of the 20 largest language editions of Wikipedia (as of 26 April 2017)[135] (millions of articles) 0.1 0.3 1 3 English 5,393,611 Cebuano 4,138,135 Swedish 3,785,049 German 2,048,714 Dutch 1,897,908 French 1,858,259 Russian 1,384,908 Italian 1,346,331 Spanish 1,327,066 Waray 1,262,379 Polish 1,215,642 Vietnamese 1,155,136 Japanese 1,055,534 Portuguese 964,262 Chinese 934,268 Ukrainian 688,922 Catalan 538,744 Persian 526,845 Arabic 513,311 Norwegian 464,789 The unit for the numbers in bars is articles. Since Wikipedia is based on the Web and therefore worldwide, contributors to the same language edition may use different dialects or may come from different countries (as is the case for the English edition). These differences may lead to some conflicts over spelling differences (e.g. colour versus color)[136] or points of view.[137] Though the various language editions are held to global policies such as "neutral point of view", they diverge on some points of policy and practice, most notably on whether images that are not licensed freely may be used under a claim of fair use.[138][139][140] Jimmy Wales has described Wikipedia as "an effort to create and distribute a free encyclopedia of the highest possible quality to every single person on the planet in their own language".[141] Though each language edition functions more or less independently, some efforts are made to supervise them all. They are coordinated in part by Meta-Wiki, the Wikimedia Foundation's wiki devoted to maintaining all of its projects (Wikipedia and others).[142] For instance, Meta-Wiki provides important statistics on all language editions of Wikipedia,[143] and it maintains a list of articles every Wikipedia should have.[144] The list concerns basic content by subject: biography, history, geography, society, culture, science, technology, and mathematics. As for the rest, it is not rare for articles strongly related to a particular language not to have counterparts in another edition. For example, articles about small towns in the United States might only be available in English, even when they meet notability criteria of other language Wikipedia projects. Estimation of contributions shares from different regions in the world to different Wikipedia editions Translated articles represent only a small portion of articles in most editions, in part because fully automated translation of articles is disallowed.[145] Articles available in more than one language may offer "interwiki links", which link to the counterpart articles in other editions. A study published by PLOS ONE in 2012 also estimated the share of contributions to different editions of Wikipedia from different regions of the world. It reported that the proportion of the edits made from North America was 51% for the English Wikipedia, and 25% for the simple English Wikipedia.[146] The Wikimedia Foundation hopes to increase the number of editors in the Global South to thirty-seven percent by 2015.[147] On March 1, 2014, The Economist in an article titled "The Future of Wikipedia" cited a trend analysis concerning data published by Wikimedia stating that: "The number of editors for the English-language version has fallen by a third in seven years."[148] The attrition rate for active editors in English Wikipedia was cited by The Economist as substantially in contrast to statistics for Wikipedia in other languages (non-English Wikipedia). The Economist reported that the number of contributors with an average of five of more edits per month was relatively constant since 2008 for Wikipedia in other languages at approximately 42,000 editors within narrow seasonal variances of about 2,000 editors up or down. The attrition rates for editors in English Wikipedia, by sharp comparison, were cited as peaking in 2007 at approximately 50,000 editors which has dropped to 30,000 editors as of the start of 2014. At the quoted trend rate, the number of active editors in English Wikipedia has lost approximately 20,000 editors to attrition since 2007, and the documented trend rate indicates the loss of another 20,000 editors by 2021, down to 10,000 active editors on English Wikipedia by 2021 if left unabated.[148] Given that the trend analysis published in The Economist presents the number of active editors for Wikipedia in other languages (non-English Wikipedia) as remaining relatively constant and successful in sustaining its numbers at approximately 42,000 active editors, the contrast has pointed to the effectiveness of Wikipedia in other languages to retain its active editors on a renewable and sustained basis.[148] No comment was made concerning which of the differentiated edit policy standards from Wikipedia in other languages (non-English Wikipedia) would provide a possible alternative to English Wikipedia for effectively ameliorating substantial editor attrition rates on the English language Wikipedia.[149] Critical reception See also: Academic studies about Wikipedia and Criticism of Wikipedia Several Wikipedians have criticized Wikipedia's large and growing regulation, which includes over 50 policies and nearly 150,000 words as of 2014[update].[150][151] Critics have stated that Wikipedia exhibits systemic bias. Columnist and journalist Edwin Black criticizes Wikipedia for being a mixture of "truth, half truth, and some falsehoods".[20] Articles in The Chronicle of Higher Education and The Journal of Academic Librarianship have criticized Wikipedia's Undue Weight policy, concluding that the fact that Wikipedia explicitly is not designed to provide correct information about a subject, but rather focus on all the major viewpoints on the subject and give less attention to minor ones, creates omissions that can lead to false beliefs based on incomplete information.[152][153][154] Journalists Oliver Kamm and Edwin Black noted how articles are dominated by the loudest and most persistent voices, usually by a group with an "ax to grind" on the topic.[20][155] An article in Education Next Journal concluded that as a resource about controversial topics, Wikipedia is notoriously subject to manipulation and spin.[21] In 2006, the Wikipedia Watch criticism website listed dozens of examples of plagiarism in the English Wikipedia.[156] Accuracy of content Main article: Reliability of Wikipedia Articles for traditional encyclopedias such as Encyclopædia Britannica are carefully and deliberately written by experts, lending such encyclopedias a reputation for accuracy.[157] Conversely, Wikipedia is often cited for factual inaccuracies and misrepresentations. However, a peer review in 2005 of forty-two scientific entries on both Wikipedia and Encyclopædia Britannica by the science journal Nature found few differences in accuracy, and concluded that "the average science entry in Wikipedia contained around four inaccuracies; Britannica, about three."[19] Reagle suggested that while the study reflects "a topical strength of Wikipedia contributors" in science articles, "Wikipedia may not have fared so well using a random sampling of articles or on humanities subjects."[158] The findings by Nature were disputed by Encyclopædia Britannica,[159][160] and in response, Nature gave a rebuttal of the points raised by Britannica.[161] In addition to the point-for-point disagreement between these two parties, others have examined the sample size and selection method used in the Nature effort, and suggested a "flawed study design" (in Nature's manual selection of articles, in part or in whole, for comparison), absence of statistical analysis (e.g., of reported confidence intervals), and a lack of study "statistical power" (i.e., owing to small sample size, 42 or 4 x 101 articles compared, vs >105 and >106 set sizes for Britannica and the English Wikipedia, respectively).[162] As a consequence of the open structure, Wikipedia "makes no guarantee of validity" of its content, since no one is ultimately responsible for any claims appearing in it.[163] Concerns have been raised by PC World in 2009 regarding the lack of accountability that results from users' anonymity,[164] the insertion of false information,[165] vandalism, and similar problems. Economist Tyler Cowen wrote: "If I had to guess whether Wikipedia or the median refereed journal article on economics was more likely to be true, after a not so long think I would opt for Wikipedia." He comments that some traditional sources of non-fiction suffer from systemic biases and novel results, in his opinion, are over-reported in journal articles and relevant information is omitted from news reports. However, he also cautions that errors are frequently found on Internet sites, and that academics and experts must be vigilant in correcting them.[166] Critics argue that Wikipedia's open nature and a lack of proper sources for most of the information makes it unreliable.[167] Some commentators suggest that Wikipedia may be reliable, but that the reliability of any given article is not clear.[168] Editors of traditional reference works such as the Encyclopædia Britannica have questioned the project's utility and status as an encyclopedia.[169] External video Inside Wikipedia – Attack of the PR Industry, Deutsche Welle, 7:13 mins[170] Wikipedia's open structure inherently makes it an easy target for Internet trolls, spammers, and various forms of paid advocacy seen as counterproductive to the maintenance of a neutral and verifiable online encyclopedia.[73][171] In response to paid advocacy editing and undisclosed editing issues, Wikipedia was reported in an article by Jeff Elder in The Wall Street Journal on June 16, 2014, to have strengthened its rules and laws against undisclosed editing.[172] The article stated that: "Beginning Monday [from date of article], changes in Wikipedia's terms of use will require anyone paid to edit articles to disclose that arrangement. Katherine Maher, the nonprofit Wikimedia Foundation's chief communications officer, said the changes address a sentiment among volunteer editors that, 'we're not an advertising service; we're an encyclopedia.'"[172][173][174][175][176] These issues, among others, had been parodied since the first decade of Wikipedia, notably by Stephen Colbert on The Colbert Report.[177] Most university lecturers discourage students from citing any encyclopedia in academic work, preferring primary sources;[178] some specifically prohibit Wikipedia citations.[179][180] Wales stresses that encyclopedias of any type are not usually appropriate to use as citeable sources, and should not be relied upon as authoritative.[181] Wales once (2006 or earlier) said he receives about ten emails weekly from students saying they got failing grades on papers because they cited Wikipedia; he told the students they got what they deserved. "For God's sake, you're in college; don't cite the encyclopedia", he said.[182] In February 2007, an article in The Harvard Crimson newspaper reported that a few of the professors at Harvard University were including Wikipedia articles in their syllabi, although without realizing the articles might change.[183] In June 2007, former president of the American Library Association Michael Gorman condemned Wikipedia, along with Google,[184] stating that academics who endorse the use of Wikipedia are "the intellectual equivalent of a dietitian who recommends a steady diet of Big Macs with everything". A Harvard law textbook, Legal Research in a Nutshell (2011), cites Wikipedia as a "general source" that "can be a real boon" in "coming up to speed in the law governing a situation" and, "while not authoritative, can provide basic facts as well as leads to more in-depth resources".[185] Medical information See also: Health information on Wikipedia On March 5, 2014, Julie Beck writing for The Atlantic magazine in an article titled "Doctors' #1 Source for Healthcare Information: Wikipedia", stated that "Fifty percent of physicians look up conditions on the (Wikipedia) site, and some are editing articles themselves to improve the quality of available information."[186] Beck continued to detail in this article new programs of Dr. Amin Azzam at the University of San Francisco to offer medical school courses to medical students for learning to edit and improve Wikipedia articles on health-related issues, as well as internal quality control programs within Wikipedia organized by Dr. James Heilman to improve a group of 200 health-related articles of central medical importance up to Wikipedia's highest standard of articles using its Featured Article and Good Article peer review evaluation process.[186] In a May 7, 2014, follow-up article in The Atlantic titled "Can Wikipedia Ever Be a Definitive Medical Text?", Julie Beck quotes Wikiproject Medicine's Dr. James Heilman as stating: "Just because a reference is peer-reviewed doesn't mean it's a high-quality reference."[187] Beck added that: "Wikipedia has its own peer review process before articles can be classified as 'good' or 'featured.' Heilman, who has participated in that process before, says 'less than 1 percent' of Wikipedia's medical articles have passed.[187] Quality of writing In 2008, researchers at Carnegie Mellon University found that the quality of a Wikipedia article would suffer rather than gain from adding more writers when the article lacked appropriate explicit or implicit coordination.[188] For instance, when contributors rewrite small portions of an entry rather than making full-length revisions, high- and low-quality content may be intermingled within an entry. Roy Rosenzweig, a history professor, stated that American National Biography Online outperformed Wikipedia in terms of its "clear and engaging prose", which, he said, was an important aspect of good historical writing.[189] Contrasting Wikipedia's treatment of Abraham Lincoln to that of Civil War historian James McPherson in American National Biography Online, he said that both were essentially accurate and covered the major episodes in Lincoln's life, but praised "McPherson's richer contextualization […] his artful use of quotations to capture Lincoln's voice […] and […] his ability to convey a profound message in a handful of words." By contrast, he gives an example of Wikipedia's prose that he finds "both verbose and dull". Rosenzweig also criticized the "waffling—encouraged by the NPOV policy—[which] means that it is hard to discern any overall interpretive stance in Wikipedia history". By example, he quoted the conclusion of Wikipedia's article on William Clarke Quantrill. While generally praising the article, he pointed out its "waffling" conclusion: "Some historians […] remember him as an opportunistic, bloodthirsty outlaw, while others continue to view him as a daring soldier and local folk hero."[189] Other critics have made similar charges that, even if Wikipedia articles are factually accurate, they are often written in a poor, almost unreadable style. Frequent Wikipedia critic Andrew Orlowski commented: "Even when a Wikipedia entry is 100 per cent factually correct, and those facts have been carefully chosen, it all too often reads as if it has been translated from one language to another then into to a third, passing an illiterate translator at each stage."[190] A study of Wikipedia articles on cancer was conducted in 2010 by Yaacov Lawrence of the Kimmel Cancer Center at Thomas Jefferson University. The study was limited to those articles that could be found in the Physician Data Query and excluded those written at the "start" class or "stub" class level. Lawrence found the articles accurate but not very readable, and thought that "Wikipedia's lack of readability (to non-college readers) may reflect its varied origins and haphazard editing".[191] The Economist argued that better-written articles tend to be more reliable: "inelegant or ranting prose usually reflects muddled thoughts and incomplete information".[192] Coverage of topics and systemic bias See also: Notability in the English Wikipedia and Criticism of Wikipedia § Systemic bias in coverage Parts of this article (those related to d:Wikidata:Statistics/Wikipedia) need to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (March 2017) Wikipedia seeks to create a summary of all human knowledge in the form of an online encyclopedia, with each topic covered encyclopedically in one article. Since it has terabytes of disk space, it can have far more topics than can be covered by any printed encyclopedia.[193] The exact degree and manner of coverage on Wikipedia is under constant review by its editors, and disagreements are not uncommon (see deletionism and inclusionism).[194][195] Wikipedia contains materials that some people may find objectionable, offensive, or pornographic because Wikipedia is not censored. The policy has sometimes proved controversial: in 2008, Wikipedia rejected an online petition against the inclusion of images of Muhammad in the English edition of its Muhammad article, citing this policy. The presence of politically, religiously, and pornographically sensitive materials in Wikipedia has led to the censorship of Wikipedia by national authorities in China,[196] Pakistan,[197] and the United Kingdom,[198] among other countries. Pie chart of Wikipedia content by subject as of January 2008[199] A 2008 study conducted by researchers at Carnegie Mellon University and Palo Alto Research Center gave a distribution of topics as well as growth (from July 2006 to January 2008) in each field:[199] Culture and the arts: 30% (210%) Biographies and persons: 15% (97%) Geography and places: 14% (52%) Society and social sciences: 12% (83%) History and events: 11% (143%) Natural and physical sciences: 9% (213%) Technology and the applied sciences: 4% (?6%) Religions and belief systems: 2% (38%) Health: 2% (42%) Mathematics and logic: 1% (146%) Thought and philosophy: 1% (160%) These numbers refer only to the quantity of articles: it is possible for one topic to contain a large number of short articles and another to contain a small number of large ones. Through its "Wikipedia Loves Libraries" program, Wikipedia has partnered with major public libraries such as the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts to expand its coverage of underrepresented subjects and articles.[200] A 2011 study conducted by researchers at the University of Minnesota indicated that male and female editors focus on different coverage topics. There was a greater concentration of females in the People and Arts category, while males focus more on Geography and Science.[201] Coverage of topics and selection bias Research conducted by Mark Graham of the Oxford Internet Institute in 2009 indicated that the geographic distribution of article topics is highly uneven. Africa is most underrepresented.[202] An editorial in The Guardian in 2014 noted that women porn stars are better covered than women writers as a further example.[203] Systemic bias When multiple editors contribute to one topic or set of topics, systemic bias may arise, due to the demographic backgrounds of the editors. In 2011, Wales noted that the unevenness of coverage is a reflection of the demography of the editors, which predominantly consists of young males with high education levels in the developed world (cf. previously).[49] The October 22, 2013 essay by Tom Simonite in MIT's Technology Review titled "The Decline of Wikipedia" discussed the effect of systemic bias and policy creep on the downward trend in the number of editors.[50] Systemic bias on Wikipedia may follow that of culture generally, for example favoring certain nationalities, ethnicities or majority religions.[204] It may more specifically follow the biases of Internet culture, inclining to being young, male, English-speaking, educated, technologically aware, and wealthy enough to spare time for editing. Biases of its own may include over-emphasis on topics such as pop culture, technology, and current events.[204] Taha Yasseri of the University of Oxford, in 2013, studied the statistical trends of systemic bias at Wikipedia introduced by editing conflicts and their resolution.[205][206] His research examined the counterproductive work behavior of edit warring. Yasseri contended that simple reverts or "undo" operations were not the most significant measure of counterproductive behavior at Wikipedia and relied instead on the statistical measurement of detecting "reverting/reverted pairs" or "mutually reverting edit pairs". Such a "mutually reverting edit pair" is defined where one editor reverts the edit of another editor who then, in sequence, returns to revert the first editor in the "mutually reverting edit pairs". The results were tabulated for several language versions of Wikipedia. The English Wikipedia's three largest conflict rates belonged to the articles George W. Bush, Anarchism and Muhammad.[206] By comparison, for the German Wikipedia, the three largest conflict rates at the time of the Oxford study were for the articles covering (i) Croatia, (ii) Scientology and (iii) 9/11 conspiracy theories.[206] Researchers from the Washington University developed a statistical model to measure systematic bias in the behavior of Wikipedia's users regarding controversial topics. The authors focused on behavioral changes of the encyclopedia's administrators after assuming the post, writing that systematic bias occurred after the fact.[207][208] Identifying the filter-bubble problem Dimitra Kessenides, writing for Bloomberg News Weekly, identified the 'filter-bubble' problem as a recurrent and long-standing issue at Wikipedia.[209] As Kessenides states: "If the only way to get an article about the developing world published on Wikipedia was to know a former board member, it was hard to imagine how a random editor in Johannesburg or Bangalore would have any hope... This so-called filter-bubble problem, coined by Eli Pariser, co-founder of the viral video site Upworthy, is the idea that the internet can contribute to the insularity of certain communities. Filter bubbles have been blamed for the spread of misinformation during the 2016 presidential election and for the failure of pundits in the U.K. to anticipate Brexit... Wikipedia's filter-bubble problem is a particularly acute threat for an organization whose stated mission is 'to empower and engage people around the world.'"[209] Explicit content See also: Internet Watch Foundation and Wikipedia and Reporting of child pornography images on Wikimedia Commons “ Problem? What problem? So, you didn't know that Wikipedia has a porn problem? ” — Larry Sanger, [210] Wikipedia has been criticized for allowing information of graphic content. Articles depicting arguably objectionable content (such as Feces, Cadaver, Human penis, Vulva, and Nudity) contain graphic pictures and detailed information easily available to anyone with access to the internet, including children. The site also includes sexual content such as images and videos of masturbation and ejaculation, photographs of nude children, illustrations of zoophilia, and photos from hardcore pornographic films in its articles. The Wikipedia article about Virgin Killer—a 1976 album from German heavy metal band Scorpions—features a picture of the album's original cover, which depicts a naked prepubescent girl. The original release cover caused controversy and was replaced in some countries. In December 2008, access to the Wikipedia article Virgin Killer was blocked for four days by most Internet service providers in the United Kingdom after it was reported by a member of the public as child pornography,[211] to the Internet Watch Foundation (IWF), which issues a stop list to Internet service providers. IWF, a non-profit, non-government-affiliated organization, later criticized the inclusion of the picture as "distasteful".[212] In April 2010, Sanger wrote a letter to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, outlining his concerns that two categories of images on Wikimedia Commons contained child pornography, and were in violation of US federal obscenity law.[213] Sanger later clarified that the images, which were related to pedophilia and one about lolicon, were not of real children, but said that they constituted "obscene visual representations of the sexual abuse of children", under the PROTECT Act of 2003.[214] That law bans photographic child pornography and cartoon images and drawings of children that are obscene under American law.[214] Sanger also expressed concerns about access to the images on Wikipedia in schools.[215] Wikimedia Foundation spokesman Jay Walsh strongly rejected Sanger's accusation,[216] saying that Wikipedia did not have "material we would deem to be illegal. If we did, we would remove it."[216] Following the complaint by Sanger, Wales deleted sexual images without consulting the community. After some editors who volunteer to maintain the site argued that the decision to delete had been made hastily, Wales voluntarily gave up some of the powers he had held up to that time as part of his co-founder status. He wrote in a message to the Wikimedia Foundation mailing-list that this action was "in the interest of encouraging this discussion to be about real philosophical/content issues, rather than be about me and how quickly I acted".[217] Critics, including Wikipediocracy, noticed that many of the pornographic images deleted from Wikipedia since 2010 have reappeared.[218] Privacy One privacy concern in the case of Wikipedia is the right of a private citizen to remain a "private citizen" rather than a "public figure" in the eyes of the law.[219][notes 9] It is a battle between the right to be anonymous in cyberspace and the right to be anonymous in real life ("meatspace"). A particular problem occurs in the case of an individual who is relatively unimportant and for whom there exists a Wikipedia page against her or his wishes. In January 2006, a German court ordered the German Wikipedia shut down within Germany because it stated the full name of Boris Floricic, aka "Tron", a deceased hacker. On February 9, 2006, the injunction against Wikimedia Deutschland was overturned, with the court rejecting the notion that Tron's right to privacy or that of his parents was being violated.[220] Wikipedia has a "Volunteer Response Team" that uses the OTRS system to handle queries without having to reveal the identities of the involved parties. This is used, for example, in confirming the permission for using individual images and other media in the project.[221] Sexism Wikipedia has been described as harboring a battleground culture of sexism and harassment.[222][223] The perceived toxic attitudes and tolerance of violent and abusive language are also reasons put forth for the gender gap in Wikipedia editors.[224] In 2014, a female editor who requested a separate space on Wikipedia to discuss improving civility had her proposal referred to by a male editor using the words "the easiest way to avoid being called a cunt is not to act like one."[225] Operation A group of Wikipedia editors may form a WikiProject to focus their work on a specific topic area, using its associated discussion page to coordinate changes across multiple articles.[226] Wikimedia Foundation and Wikimedia movement affiliates Main article: Wikimedia Foundation Katherine Maher is the third executive director at Wikimedia, following the departure of Lila Tretikov in 2016. Wikipedia is hosted and funded by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization which also operates Wikipedia-related projects such as Wiktionary and Wikibooks. The foundation relies on public contributions and grants to fund its mission.[227] The foundation's 2013 IRS Form 990 shows revenue of $39.7 million and expenses of almost $29 million, with assets of $37.2 million and liabilities of about $2.3 million.[228] In May 2014, Wikimedia Foundation named Lila Tretikov as its second executive director, taking over for Sue Gardner.[229] The Wall Street Journal reported on May 1, 2014, that Tretikov's information technology background from her years at University of California offers Wikipedia an opportunity to develop in more concentrated directions guided by her often repeated position statement that, "Information, like air, wants to be free."[230][231] The same Wall Street Journal article reported these directions of development according to an interview with spokesman Jay Walsh of Wikimedia, who "said Tretikov would address that issue (paid advocacy) as a priority. 'We are really pushing toward more transparency... We are reinforcing that paid advocacy is not welcome.' Initiatives to involve greater diversity of contributors, better mobile support of Wikipedia, new geo-location tools to find local content more easily, and more tools for users in the second and third world are also priorities, Walsh said."[230] Following the departure of Tretikov from Wikipedia due to issues concerning the use of the "superprotection" feature which some language versions of Wikipedia have adopted, Katherine Maher became the third executive director the Wikimedia Foundation in June 2016.[232] Maher has stated that one of her priorities would be the issue of editor harassment endemic to Wikipedia as identified by the Wikipedia board in December. Maher stated regarding the harassment issue that: "It establishes a sense within the community that this is a priority... (and that correction requires that) it has to be more than words."[233] Wikipedia is also supported by many organizations and groups that are affiliated with the Wikimedia Foundation but independently-run, called Wikimedia movement affiliates. These include Wikimedia chapters (which are national or sub-national organizations, such as Wikimedia Deutschland and Wikimédia France), thematic organizations (such as Amical Wikimedia for the Catalan language community), and user groups. These affiliates participate in the promotion, development, and funding of Wikipedia. Software operations and support See also: MediaWiki The operation of Wikipedia depends on MediaWiki, a custom-made, free and open source wiki software platform written in PHP and built upon the MySQL database system.[234] The software incorporates programming features such as a macro language, variables, a transclusion system for templates, and URL redirection. MediaWiki is licensed under the GNU General Public License and it is used by all Wikimedia projects, as well as many other wiki projects. Originally, Wikipedia ran on UseModWiki written in Perl by Clifford Adams (Phase I), which initially required CamelCase for article hyperlinks; the present double bracket style was incorporated later. Starting in January 2002 (Phase II), Wikipedia began running on a PHP wiki engine with a MySQL database; this software was custom-made for Wikipedia by Magnus Manske. The Phase II software was repeatedly modified to accommodate the exponentially increasing demand. In July 2002 (Phase III), Wikipedia shifted to the third-generation software, MediaWiki, originally written by Lee Daniel Crocker. Several MediaWiki extensions are installed[235] to extend the functionality of the MediaWiki software. In April 2005, a Lucene extension[236][237] was added to MediaWiki's built-in search and Wikipedia switched from MySQL to Lucene for searching. The site currently uses Lucene Search 2.1,[238][needs update] which is written in Java and based on Lucene library 2.3.[239] In July 2013, after extensive beta testing, a WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) extension, VisualEditor, was opened to public use.[240][241][242][243] It was met with much rejection and criticism, and was described as "slow and buggy".[244] The feature was changed from opt-out to opt-in afterward. Automated editing Computer programs called bots have been used widely to perform simple and repetitive tasks, such as correcting common misspellings and stylistic issues, or to start articles such as geography entries in a standard format from statistical data.[245][246][247] One controversial contributor massively creating articles with his bot was reported to create up to ten thousand articles on the Swedish Wikipedia on certain days.[248] There are also some bots designed to automatically notify editors when they make common editing errors (such as unmatched quotes or unmatched parenthesis).[249] Edits misidentified by a bot as the work of a banned editor can be restored by other editors. An anti-vandal bot tries to detect and revert vandalism quickly and automatically.[246] Bots can also report edits from particular accounts or IP address ranges, as was done at the time of the MH17 jet downing incident in July 2014.[250] Bots on Wikipedia must be approved prior to activation.[251] According to Andrew Lih, the current expansion of Wikipedia to millions of articles would be difficult to envision without the use of such bots.[252] Wikiprojects, and assessments of articles' importance and quality This section is transcluded from English Wikipedia. (edit | history) Main article: WikiProject A "WikiProject" is a group of contributors who want to work together as a team to improve Wikipedia. These groups often focus on a specific topic area (for example, women's history), a specific location or a specific kind of task (for example, checking newly created pages). The English Wikipedia currently has over 2,000 WikiProjects and activity varies.[253] In 2007, in preparation for producing a print version, the English Wikipedia introduced an assessment scale of the quality of articles.[254] Articles are rated by WikiProjects. The range of quality classes begins with "Stub" (very short pages), followed by "Start", "C" and "B" (in increasing order of quality). Community peer review is needed for the article to enter one of the highest quality classes: either "A", "good article" or the highest, "featured article". Of the about 4.4 million articles and lists assessed as of March 2015, a little more than 5,000 (0.12%) are featured articles, and fewer than 2,000 (0.04%) are featured lists. One featured article per day, as selected by editors, appears on the main page of Wikipedia.[255][256] The articles can also be rated as per "importance" as judged by a WikiProject. Currently, there are 5 importance categories: "low", "mid", "high", "top", and "???" for unclassified/uncertain level. For a particular article, different WikiProjects may assign different importance levels. The Wikipedia Version 1.0 Editorial Team has developed a table (shown below) that displays data of all rated articles by quality and importance, on the English Wikipedia. If an article or list receives different ratings by two or more WikiProjects, then the highest rating is used in the table, pie-charts, and bar-chart. The software regularly auto-updates the data. Researcher Giacomo Poderi found that articles tend to reach featured status via the intensive work of a few editors.[257] A 2010 study found unevenness in quality among featured articles and concluded that the community process is ineffective in assessing the quality of articles.[258] Quality-wise distribution of over 5.5 million articles and lists on the English Wikipedia, as of 29 January 2017[update][259]   Featured articles (0.11%)   Featured lists (0.04%)   A class (0.03%)   Good articles (0.50%)   B class (2.00%)   C class (4.32%)   Start class (26.41%)   Stub class (53.01%)   Lists (3.65%)   Unassessed (9.94%) Importance-wise distribution of over 5.5 million articles and lists on the English Wikipedia, as of 29 January 2017[update][259]   Top (0.91%)   High (3.20%)   Medium (12.21%)   Low (51.68%)   ??? (32.00%) All rated articles by quality and importance Quality Importance Top High Mid Low ??? Total FA 1,189 1,841 1,732 1,091 191 6,044 FL 142 567 670 600 120 2,099 A 224 430 580 372 79 1,685 GA 2,113 4,819 9,439 10,277 1,749 28,397 B 12,177 23,035 35,303 28,337 13,885 112,737 C 10,410 30,260 67,693 94,179 43,950 246,492 Start 17,315 76,691 308,832 802,184 295,178 1,500,200 Stub 4,247 30,928 228,127 1,887,219 844,350 2,994,871 List 3,062 11,393 34,727 94,961 62,202 206,345 Assessed 50,879 179,964 687,103 2,919,220 1,261,704 5,098,870 Unassessed 137 431 1,665 16,008 533,078 551,319 Total 51,016 180,395 688,768 2,935,228 1,794,782 5,650,189 500,000 1,000,000 1,500,000 2,000,000 2,500,000 3,000,000 Top High Medium Low ???   Featured articles   Featured lists   A-class articles   Good articles   B-class articles   C-class articles   Start-class articles   Stub articles   Lists   Unassessed articles and lists [Note: The table above (prepared by the Wikipedia Version 1.0 Editorial Team) is automatically updated daily by User:WP 1.0 bot, but the bar-chart and the two pie-charts are not auto-updated. In them, new data has to be entered by a Wikipedia editor (i.e. user).] Hardware operations and support See also: Wikimedia Foundation § Hardware Wikipedia receives between 25,000 and 60,000 page requests per second, depending on time of day.[260] As of 2008[update] page requests are first passed to a front-end layer of Squid caching servers.[261][needs update] Further statistics, based on a publicly available 3-month Wikipedia access trace, are available.[262] Requests that cannot be served from the Squid cache are sent to load-balancing servers running the Linux Virtual Server software, which in turn pass them to one of the Apache web servers for page rendering from the database. The web servers deliver pages as requested, performing page rendering for all the language editions of Wikipedia. To increase speed further, rendered pages are cached in a distributed memory cache until invalidated, allowing page rendering to be skipped entirely for most common page accesses. Overview of system architecture as of December 2010[update] Wikipedia currently runs on dedicated clusters of Linux servers (mainly Ubuntu).[263][264] As of December 2009[update], there were 300 in Florida and 44 in Amsterdam.[265] By January 22, 2013, Wikipedia had migrated its primary data center to an Equinix facility in Ashburn, Virginia.[266][267] Internal research and operational development In accordance with growing amounts of incoming donations exceeding seven digits in 2013 as recently reported,[50] the Foundation has reached a threshold of assets which qualify its consideration under the principles of industrial organization economics to indicate the need for the re-investment of donations into the internal research and development of the Foundation.[268] Two of the recent projects of such internal research and development have been the creation of a Visual Editor and a largely under-utilized "Thank" tab which were developed for the purpose of ameliorating issues of editor attrition, which have met with limited success.[50][244] The estimates for reinvestment by industrial organizations into internal research and development was studied by Adam Jaffe, who recorded that the range of 4% to 25% annually was to be recommended, with high end technology requiring the higher level of support for internal reinvestment.[269] At the 2013 level of contributions for Wikimedia presently documented as 45 million dollars, the computed budget level recommended by Jaffe and Caballero for reinvestment into internal research and development is between 1.8 million and 11.3 million dollars annually.[269] In 2016, the level of contributions were reported by Blomberg News as being at $77 million annually, updating the Jaffe estimates for the higher level of support to between 3.08 million and 19.2 million dollars annually.[269] Internal news publications Community-produced news publications include the English Wikipedia's The Signpost, founded in 2005 by Michael Snow, an attorney, Wikipedia administrator and former chair of the Wikimedia Foundation board of trustees.[270] It covers news and events from the site, as well as major events from other Wikimedia projects, such as Wikimedia Commons. Similar publications are the German-language Kurier, and the Portuguese-language Correio da Wikipédia. Other past and present community news publications on English Wikipedia include the "Wikiworld" web comic, the Wikipedia Weekly podcast, and newsletters of specific WikiProjects like The Bugle from WikiProject Military History and the monthly newsletter from The Guild of Copy Editors. There are also a number of publications from the Wikimedia Foundation and multilingual publications such as the Wikimedia Blog and This Month in Education. Access to content Content licensing When the project was started in 2001, all text in Wikipedia was covered by the GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL), a copyleft license permitting the redistribution, creation of derivative works, and commercial use of content while authors retain copyright of their work.[271] The GFDL was created for software manuals that come with free software programs licensed under the GPL. This made it a poor choice for a general reference work: for example, the GFDL requires the reprints of materials from Wikipedia to come with a full copy of the GFDL text. In December 2002, the Creative Commons license was released: it was specifically designed for creative works in general, not just for software manuals. The license gained popularity among bloggers and others distributing creative works on the Web. The Wikipedia project sought the switch to the Creative Commons.[272] Because the two licenses, GFDL and Creative Commons, were incompatible, in November 2008, following the request of the project, the Free Software Foundation (FSF) released a new version of the GFDL designed specifically to allow Wikipedia to relicense its content to CC BY-SA by August 1, 2009. (A new version of the GFDL automatically covers Wikipedia contents.) In April 2009, Wikipedia and its sister projects held a community-wide referendum which decided the switch in June 2009.[273][274][275][276] The handling of media files (e.g. image files) varies across language editions. Some language editions, such as the English Wikipedia, include non-free image files under fair use doctrine, while the others have opted not to, in part because of the lack of fair use doctrines in their home countries (e.g. in Japanese copyright law). Media files covered by free content licenses (e.g. Creative Commons' CC BY-SA) are shared across language editions via Wikimedia Commons repository, a project operated by the Wikimedia Foundation. Wikipedia's accommodation of varying international copyright laws regarding images has led some to observe that its photographic coverage of topics lags behind the quality of the encyclopedic text.[277] The Wikimedia Foundation is not a licensor of content, but merely a hosting service for the contributors (and licensors) of the Wikipedia. This position has been successfully defended in court.[278][279] Methods of access Because Wikipedia content is distributed under an open license, anyone can reuse or re-distribute it at no charge. The content of Wikipedia has been published in many forms, both online and offline, outside of the Wikipedia website. Websites – Thousands of "mirror sites" exist that republish content from Wikipedia: two prominent ones, that also include content from other reference sources, are Reference.com and Answers.com. Another example is Wapedia, which began to display Wikipedia content in a mobile-device-friendly format before Wikipedia itself did. Mobile apps – A variety of mobile apps provide access to Wikipedia on hand-held devices, including both Android and iOS devices (see Wikipedia apps). (See also Mobile access.) Search engines – Some web search engines make special use of Wikipedia content when displaying search results: examples include Bing (via technology gained from Powerset)[280] and DuckDuckGo. Compact discs, DVDs – Collections of Wikipedia articles have been published on optical discs. An English version, 2006 Wikipedia CD Selection, contained about 2,000 articles.[281][282] The Polish-language version contains nearly 240,000 articles.[283] There are German- and Spanish-language versions as well.[284][285] Also, "Wikipedia for Schools", the Wikipedia series of CDs / DVDs produced by Wikipedians and SOS Children, is a free, hand-checked, non-commercial selection from Wikipedia targeted around the UK National Curriculum and intended to be useful for much of the English-speaking world.[286] The project is available online; an equivalent print encyclopedia would require roughly 20 volumes. Printed books – There are efforts to put a select subset of Wikipedia's articles into printed book form.[287][288] Since 2009, tens of thousands of print-on-demand books that reproduced English, German, Russian and French Wikipedia articles have been produced by the American company Books LLC and by three Mauritian subsidiaries of the German publisher VDM.[289] Semantic Web – The website DBpedia, begun in 2007, extracts data from the infoboxes and category declarations of the English-language Wikipedia. Wikimedia has created the Wikidata project with a similar objective of storing the basic facts from each page of Wikipedia and the other WMF wikis and make it available in a queriable semantic format, RDF. This is still under development. As of Feb 2014 it has 15,000,000 items and 1,000 properties for describing them. Obtaining the full contents of Wikipedia for reuse presents challenges, since direct cloning via a web crawler is discouraged.[290] Wikipedia publishes "dumps" of its contents, but these are text-only; as of 2007[update] there was no dump available of Wikipedia's images.[291] Several languages of Wikipedia also maintain a reference desk, where volunteers answer questions from the general public. According to a study by Pnina Shachaf in the Journal of Documentation, the quality of the Wikipedia reference desk is comparable to a standard library reference desk, with an accuracy of 55%.[292] Mobile access See also: Help:Mobile access The mobile version of the English Wikipedia's main page Wikipedia's original medium was for users to read and edit content using any standard web browser through a fixed Internet connection. Although Wikipedia content has been accessible through the mobile web since July 2013, The New York Times on February 9, 2014, quoted Erik Möller, deputy director of the Wikimedia Foundation, stating that the transition of internet traffic from desktops to mobile devices was significant and a cause for concern and worry.[16] The article in The New York Times reported the comparison statistics for mobile edits stating that, "Only 20 percent of the readership of the English-language Wikipedia comes via mobile devices, a figure substantially lower than the percentage of mobile traffic for other media sites, many of which approach 50 percent. And the shift to mobile editing has lagged even more."[16] The New York Times reports that Möller has assigned "a team of 10 software developers focused on mobile", out of a total of approximately 200 employees working at the Wikimedia Foundation. One principal concern cited by The New York Times for the "worry" is for Wikipedia to effectively address attrition issues with the number of editors which the online encyclopedia attracts to edit and maintain its content in a mobile access environment.[16] Bloomberg Businessweek reported in July 2014 that Google's Android mobile apps have dominated the largest share of global smartphone shipments for 2013 with 78.6% of market share over their next closest competitor in iOS with 15.2% of the market.[293] At the time of the Tretikov appointment and her posted web interview with Sue Gardner in May 2014, Wikimedia representatives made a technical announcement concerning the number of mobile access systems in the market seeking access to Wikipedia. Directly after the posted web interview, the representatives stated that Wikimedia would be applying an all-inclusive approach to accommodate as many mobile access systems as possible in its efforts for expanding general mobile access, including BlackBerry and the Windows Phone system, making market share a secondary issue.[231] The latest version of the Android app for Wikipedia was released on July 23, 2014, to generally positive reviews, scoring over four of a possible five in a poll of approximately 200,000 users downloading from Google.[294] The latest version for iOS was released on April 3, 2013, to similar reviews.[295] Access to Wikipedia from mobile phones was possible as early as 2004, through the Wireless Application Protocol (WAP), via the Wapedia service. In June 2007 Wikipedia launched en.mobile.wikipedia.org, an official website for wireless devices. In 2009 a newer mobile service was officially released,[296] located at en.m.wikipedia.org, which caters to more advanced mobile devices such as the iPhone, Android-based devices or WebOS-based devices. Several other methods of mobile access to Wikipedia have emerged. Many devices and applications optimize or enhance the display of Wikipedia content for mobile devices, while some also incorporate additional features such as use of Wikipedia metadata (See Wikipedia:Metadata), such as geoinformation.[297][298] Wikipedia Zero is an initiative of the Wikimedia Foundation to expand the reach of the encyclopedia to the developing countries.[299] Andrew Lih and Andrew Brown both maintain editing Wikipedia with smart phones is difficult and this discourages new potential contributors. Several years running the number of Wikipedia editors has been falling and Tom Simonite of MIT Technology Review claims the bureaucratic structure and rules are a factor in this. Simonite alleges some Wikipedians use the labyrinthine rules and guidelines to dominate others and those editors have a vested interest in keeping the status quo.[50] Lih alleges there is serious disagreement among existing contributors how to resolve this. Lih fears for Wikipedia's long term future while Brown fears problems with Wikipedia will remain and rival encyclopedias will not replace it.[300][301] Cultural impact Readership Wikipedia is extremely popular. In February 2014, The New York Times reported that Wikipedia is ranked fifth globally among all websites, stating "With 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors a month […] Wikipedia trails just Yahoo, Facebook, Microsoft and Google, the largest with 1.2 billion unique visitors."[16] In addition to logistic growth in the number of its articles,[302] Wikipedia has steadily gained status as a general reference website since its inception in 2001.[303] About 50% of search engine traffic to Wikipedia comes from Google,[304] a good portion of which is related to academic research.[305] The number of readers of Wikipedia worldwide reached 365 million at the end of 2009.[306] The Pew Internet and American Life project found that one third of US Internet users consulted Wikipedia.[307] In 2011 Business Insider gave Wikipedia a valuation of $4 billion if it ran advertisements.[308] According to "Wikipedia Readership Survey 2011", the average age of Wikipedia readers is 36, with a rough parity between genders. Almost half of Wikipedia readers visit the site more than five times a month, and a similar number of readers specifically look for Wikipedia in search engine results. About 47% of Wikipedia readers do not realize that Wikipedia is a non-profit organization.[309] Cultural significance Main article: Wikipedia in culture Wikipedia Monument in S?ubice, Poland Wikipedia's content has also been used in academic studies, books, conferences, and court cases.[310][311][312] The Parliament of Canada's website refers to Wikipedia's article on same-sex marriage in the "related links" section of its "further reading" list for the Civil Marriage Act.[313] The encyclopedia's assertions are increasingly used as a source by organizations such as the US federal courts and the World Intellectual Property Organization[314] – though mainly for supporting information rather than information decisive to a case.[315] Content appearing on Wikipedia has also been cited as a source and referenced in some US intelligence agency reports.[316] In December 2008, the scientific journal RNA Biology launched a new section for descriptions of families of RNA molecules and requires authors who contribute to the section to also submit a draft article on the RNA family for publication in Wikipedia.[317] Wikipedia has also been used as a source in journalism,[318][319] often without attribution, and several reporters have been dismissed for plagiarizing from Wikipedia.[320][321][322] In 2006, Time magazine recognized Wikipedia's participation (along with YouTube, Reddit, MySpace, and Facebook[323]) in the rapid growth of online collaboration and interaction by millions of people worldwide. In July 2007 Wikipedia was the focus of a 30-minute documentary on BBC Radio 4[324] which argued that, with increased usage and awareness, the number of references to Wikipedia in popular culture is such that the word is one of a select band of 21st-century nouns that are so familiar (Google, Facebook, YouTube) that they no longer need explanation. On September 28, 2007, Italian politician Franco Grillini raised a parliamentary question with the minister of cultural resources and activities about the necessity of freedom of panorama. He said that the lack of such freedom forced Wikipedia, "the seventh most consulted website", to forbid all images of modern Italian buildings and art, and claimed this was hugely damaging to tourist revenues.[325] Play media Wikipedia, an introduction – Erasmus Prize 2015 Jimmy Wales receiving the Quadriga A Mission of Enlightenment award On September 16, 2007, The Washington Post reported that Wikipedia had become a focal point in the 2008 US election campaign, saying: "Type a candidate's name into Google, and among the first results is a Wikipedia page, making those entries arguably as important as any ad in defining a candidate. Already, the presidential entries are being edited, dissected and debated countless times each day."[326] An October 2007 Reuters article, titled "Wikipedia page the latest status symbol", reported the recent phenomenon of how having a Wikipedia article vindicates one's notability.[327] Active participation also has an impact. Law students have been assigned to write Wikipedia articles as an exercise in clear and succinct writing for an uninitiated audience.[328] A working group led by Peter Stone (formed as a part of the Stanford-based project One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence) in its report called Wikipedia "the best-known example of crowdsourcing... that far exceeds traditionally-compiled information sources, such as encyclopedias and dictionaries, in scale and depth."[329] Awards Wikipedia team visiting to Parliament of Asturias Wikipedians meeting after the Asturias awards ceremony Wikipedia won two major awards in May 2004.[330] The first was a Golden Nica for Digital Communities of the annual Prix Ars Electronica contest; this came with a €10,000 (£6,588; $12,700) grant and an invitation to present at the PAE Cyberarts Festival in Austria later that year. The second was a Judges' Webby Award for the "community" category.[331] Wikipedia was also nominated for a "Best Practices" Webby award. In 2007, readers of brandchannel.com voted Wikipedia as the fourth-highest brand ranking, receiving 15% of the votes in answer to the question "Which brand had the most impact on our lives in 2006?"[332] In September 2008, Wikipedia received Quadriga A Mission of Enlightenment award of Werkstatt Deutschland along with Boris Tadi?, Eckart Höfling, and Peter Gabriel. The award was presented to Wales by David Weinberger.[333] In 2015, Wikipedia was awarded both the annual Erasmus Prize, which recognizes exceptional contributions to culture, society or social sciences,[334] and the Spanish Princess of Asturias Award on International Cooperation.[335] Speaking at the Asturian Parliament in Oviedo, the city that hosts the awards ceremony, Jimmy Wales praised the work of the Asturian language Wikipedia users.[336] The night of the ceremony, members of the Wikimedia Foundation held a meeting with Wikipedians from all parts of Spain, including the local Asturian community. Satire See also: Category:Parodies of Wikipedia. Many parodies target Wikipedia's openness and susceptibility to inserted inaccuracies, with characters vandalizing or modifying the online encyclopedia project's articles. Comedian Stephen Colbert has parodied or referenced Wikipedia on numerous episodes of his show The Colbert Report and coined the related term wikiality, meaning "together we can create a reality that we all agree on—the reality we just agreed on".[177] Another example can be found in "Wikipedia Celebrates 750 Years of American Independence", a July 2006 front-page article in The Onion,[337] as well as the 2010 The Onion article "'L.A. Law' Wikipedia Page Viewed 874 Times Today".[338] In an episode of the television comedy The Office U.S., which aired in April 2007, an incompetent office manager (Michael Scott) is shown relying on a hypothetical Wikipedia article for information on negotiation tactics in order to assist him in negotiating lesser pay for an employee.[339] The tactics he used failed, as a joke about the unreliability of Wikipedia and what anyone can do to change its contents. Viewers of the show tried to add the episode's mention of the page as a section of the actual Wikipedia article on negotiation, but this effort was prevented by other users on the article's talk page.[340] "My Number One Doctor", a 2007 episode of the television show Scrubs, played on the perception that Wikipedia is an unreliable reference tool with a scene in which Dr. Perry Cox reacts to a patient who says that a Wikipedia article indicates that the raw food diet reverses the effects of bone cancer by retorting that the same editor who wrote that article also wrote the Battlestar Galactica episode guide.[341] In 2008, the comedic website CollegeHumor produced a video sketch named "Professor Wikipedia", in which the fictitious Professor Wikipedia instructs a class with a medley of unverifiable and occasionally absurd statements.[342] The Dilbert comic strip from May 8, 2009, features a character supporting an improbable claim by saying "Give me ten minutes and then check Wikipedia."[343] In July 2009, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a comedy series called Bigipedia, which was set on a website which was a parody of Wikipedia. Some of the sketches were directly inspired by Wikipedia and its articles.[344] In 2010, comedian Daniel Tosh encouraged viewers of his show, Tosh.0, to visit the show's Wikipedia article and edit it at will. On a later episode, he commented on the edits to the article, most of them offensive, which had been made by the audience and had prompted the article to be locked from editing.[345][346] On August 23, 2013, the New Yorker website published a cartoon with this caption: "Dammit, Manning, have you considered the pronoun war that this is going to start on your Wikipedia page?"[347] In December 2015, John Julius Norwich stated, in a letter published in The Times newspaper, that as an historian he resorted to Wikipedia "at least a dozen times a day", and had never yet caught it out. He described it as "a work of reference as useful as any in existence", with so wide a range that it is almost impossible to find a person, place or thing that it has left uncovered, and that he could never have written his last two books without it.[348][349] Sister projects – Wikimedia Main article: Wikimedia project Wikipedia has also spawned several sister projects, which are also wikis run by the Wikimedia Foundation. These other Wikimedia projects include Wiktionary, a dictionary project launched in December 2002,[350] Wikiquote, a collection of quotations created a week after Wikimedia launched, Wikibooks, a collection of collaboratively written free textbooks and annotated texts, Wikimedia Commons, a site devoted to free-knowledge multimedia, Wikinews, for citizen journalism, and Wikiversity, a project for the creation of free learning materials and the provision of online learning activities.[351] Of these, only Commons has had success comparable to that of Wikipedia. Another sister project of Wikipedia, Wikispecies, is a catalogue of species. In 2012 Wikivoyage, an editable travel guide, and Wikidata, an editable knowledge base, launched. Publishing A group of Wikimedians of the Wikimedia DC chapter at the 2013 DC Wikimedia annual meeting standing in front of the Encyclopædia Britannica (back left) at the US National Archives The most obvious economic effect of Wikipedia has been the death of commercial encyclopedias, especially the printed versions, e.g. Encyclopædia Britannica, which were unable to compete with a product that is essentially free.[352][353][354] Nicholas Carr wrote a 2005 essay, "The amorality of Web 2.0", that criticized websites with user-generated content, like Wikipedia, for possibly leading to professional (and, in his view, superior) content producers' going out of business, because "free trumps quality all the time". Carr wrote: "Implicit in the ecstatic visions of Web 2.0 is the hegemony of the amateur. I for one can't imagine anything more frightening."[355] Others dispute the notion that Wikipedia, or similar efforts, will entirely displace traditional publications. For instance, Chris Anderson, the editor-in-chief of Wired Magazine, wrote in Nature that the "wisdom of crowds" approach of Wikipedia will not displace top scientific journals, with their rigorous peer review process.[356] There is also an ongoing debate about the influence of Wikipedia on the biography publishing business. "The worry is that, if you can get all that information from Wikipedia, what's left for biography?" said Kathryn Hughes, professor of life writing at UEA and author of The Short Life and Long Times of Mrs Beeton and George Eliot: the Last Victorian.[357] Scientific use Wikipedia has seen been widely used as a corpus for linguistic research in computational linguistics, information retrieval and natural language processing. In particular, it commonly serves as a target knowledge base for the entity linking problem, which is then called "wikification",[358] and to the related problem of word sense disambiguation.[359] Methods similar to wikification can in turn be used to find "missing" links in Wikipedia.[360] In 2015, French researchers Dr José Lages of the University of Franche-Comté in Besançon and Dima Shepelyansky of Paul Sabatier University in Toulouse published a global university ranking based on Wikipedia scholarly citations.[361][362][363] They used PageRank "followed by the number of appearances in the 24 different language editions of Wikipedia (descending order) and the century in which they were founded (ascending order)."[363] Related projects A number of interactive multimedia encyclopedias incorporating entries written by the public existed long before Wikipedia was founded. The first of these was the 1986 BBC Domesday Project, which included text (entered on BBC Micro computers) and photographs from over 1 million contributors in the UK, and covered the geography, art, and culture of the UK. This was the first interactive multimedia encyclopedia (and was also the first major multimedia document connected through internal links), with the majority of articles being accessible through an interactive map of the UK. The user interface and part of the content of the Domesday Project were emulated on a website until 2008.[364] Several free-content, collaborative encyclopedias were created around the same period as Wikipedia (e.g. Everything2),[365] with many later being merged into the project (e.g. GNE).[366] One of the most successful early online encyclopedias incorporating entries by the public was h2g2, which was created by Douglas Adams in 1999. The h2g2 encyclopedia is relatively light-hearted, focusing on articles which are both witty and informative. Subsequent collaborative knowledge websites have drawn inspiration from Wikipedia. Some, such as Susning.nu, Enciclopedia Libre, Hudong, and Baidu Baike likewise employ no formal review process, although some like Conservapedia are not as open. Others use more traditional peer review, such as Encyclopedia of Life and the online wiki encyclopedias Scholarpedia and Citizendium. The latter was started by Sanger in an attempt to create a reliable alternative to Wikipedia.[367][368] See also Internet portal Outline of Wikipedia – guide to the subject of Wikipedia presented as a tree structured list of its subtopics; for an outline of the contents of Wikipedia, see Portal:Contents/Outlines Conflict-of-interest editing on Wikipedia Democratization of knowledge Interpedia, an early proposal for a collaborative Internet encyclopedia List of Internet encyclopedias Network effect Print Wikipedia art project to visualize how big Wikipedia is. In cooperation with Wikimedia foundation. QRpedia – multilingual, mobile interface to Wikipedia Wikipedia Review References ^ Sidener, Jonathan (December 6, 2004). "Everyone's Encyclopedia". U-T San Diego. Archived from the original on January 14, 2016. Retrieved October 15, 2006.  ^ Roger Chapman. "Top 40 Website Programming Languages". roadchap.com. Archived from the original on September 22, 2013. Retrieved September 6, 2011.  CS1 maint: Unfit url (link) ^ "Wikipedia founder defends decision to encrypt the site in China". The Verge. Retrieved September 19, 2015.  ^ Bill Tancer (May 1, 2007). "Look Who's Using Wikipedia". Time. Retrieved December 1, 2007. The sheer volume of content […] is partly responsible for the site's dominance as an online reference. When compared to the top 3,200 educational reference sites in the US, Wikipedia is No. 1, capturing 24.3% of all visits to the category . Cf. Bill Tancer (Global Manager, Hitwise), "Wikipedia, Search and School Homework" Archived March 25, 2012, at the Wayback Machine., Hitwise, March 1, 2007. ^ Alex Woodson (July 8, 2007). "Wikipedia remains go-to site for online news". Reuters. Retrieved December 16, 2007. Online encyclopedia Wikipedia has added about 20 million unique monthly visitors in the past year, making it the top online news and information destination, according to Nielsen//NetRatings.  ^ "comScore MMX Ranks Top 50 US Web Properties for August 2012". comScore. September 12, 2012. Retrieved February 6, 2013.  ^ a b c "How popular is wikipedia.org?". Alexa Internet. May 22, 2016. Retrieved September 4, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia pornography row deepens as Wales cedes rights – BBC News". BBC. Retrieved June 28, 2016.  ^ "The Mysterious Workings of Wikis: Who Owns What?". Ecommercetimes.com. Retrieved June 28, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation employee ousted over paid editing". Ars Technica. Retrieved June 28, 2016.  ^ a b Kock, N., Jung, Y., & Syn, T. (2016). Wikipedia and e-Collaboration Research: Opportunities and Challenges. Archived September 27, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. International Journal of e-Collaboration (IJeC), 12(2), 1–8. ^ Mike Miliard (March 1, 2008). "Wikipediots: Who Are These Devoted, Even Obsessive Contributors to Wikipedia?". Salt Lake City Weekly. Retrieved December 18, 2008.  ^ Sidener, Jonathan (October 9, 2006). "Wikipedia family feud rooted in San Diego". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Archived from the original on November 11, 2016. Retrieved May 5, 2009.  ^ "Wiki" in the Hawaiian Dictionary, revised and enlarged edition, University of Hawaii Press, 1986 ^ "Wikipedia cofounder Jimmy Wales on 60 Minutes". CBS News. Retrieved April 6, 2015.  ^ a b c d e f Cohen, Noam (February 9, 2014). "Wikipedia vs. the Small Screen". The New York Times.  ^ "Comparing featured article groups and revision patterns correlations in Wikipedia". First Monday. Retrieved July 13, 2010.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin Wattenberg; Matthew M. McKeon (July 22, 2007). "The Hidden Order of Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved October 30, 2007.  ^ a b Jim Giles (December 2005). "Internet encyclopedias go head to head". Nature. 438 (7070): 900–901. Bibcode:2005Natur.438..900G. doi:10.1038/438900a. PMID 16355180. (subscription required) Note: The study was cited in several news articles; e.g.: "Wikipedia survives research test". BBC News. December 15, 2005.  ^ a b c Black, Edwin (April 19, 2010) Wikipedia – The Dumbing Down of World Knowledge Archived September 9, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., History News Network Retrieved October 21, 2014 ^ a b J. Petrilli, Michael (SPRING 2008/Vol.8, No.2) Wikipedia or Wickedpedia? Archived November 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., Education Next Retrieved October 22, 2014 ^ "The contribution conundrum: Why did Wikipedia succeed while other encyclopedias failed?". Nieman Lab. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Richard M. Stallman (June 20, 2007). "The Free Encyclopedia Project". Free Software Foundation. Retrieved January 4, 2008.  ^ Jonathan Sidener (December 6, 2004). "Everyone's Encyclopedia". U-T San Diego. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved October 15, 2006.  ^ Meyers, Peter (September 20, 2001). "Fact-Driven? Collegial? This Site Wants You". The New York Times. Retrieved November 22, 2007. 'I can start an article that will consist of one paragraph, and then a real expert will come along and add three paragraphs and clean up my one paragraph,' said Larry Sanger of Las Vegas, who founded Wikipedia with Mr. Wales.  ^ a b c Sanger, Larry (April 18, 2005). "The Early History of Nupedia and Wikipedia: A Memoir". Slashdot. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Sanger, Larry (January 17, 2001). "Wikipedia Is Up!". Archived from the original on May 6, 2001. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia-l: LinkBacks?". Retrieved February 20, 2007.  ^ Sanger, Larry (January 10, 2001). "Let's Make a Wiki". Internet Archive. Archived from the original on April 14, 2003. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia: HomePage". Archived from the original on March 31, 2001. Retrieved March 31, 2001.  ^ "Wikipedia:Neutral point of view, Wikipedia (January 21, 2007). ^ Finkelstein, Seth (September 25, 2008). "Read me first: Wikipedia isn't about human potential, whatever Wales says". London: The Guardian.  ^ "Wikipedia, August 8, 2001". Web.archive.bibalex.org. August 8, 2001. Archived from the original on July 27, 2001. Retrieved March 3, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia, September 25, 2001". Web.archive.bibalex.org. Archived from the original on March 31, 2001. Retrieved March 3, 2014.  ^ "Multilingual statistics". Wikipedia. March 30, 2005. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Encyclopedias and Dictionaries". Encyclopædia Britannica. 18 (15th ed.). 2007. pp. 257–286.  ^ "[long] Enciclopedia Libre: msg#00008". Osdir. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Clay Shirky (February 28, 2008). Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing Without Organizations. The Penguin Press via Amazon Online Reader. p. 273. ISBN 1-59420-153-6. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Bobbie Johnson (August 12, 2009). "Wikipedia approaches its limits". The Guardian. London. Retrieved March 31, 2010.  ^ Wikipedia:Modelling_Wikipedia_extended_growth ^ The Singularity is Not Near: Slowing Growth of Wikipedia (PDF). The International Symposium on Wikis. Orlando, Florida. 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 11, 2011.  ^ Evgeny Morozov (November–December 2009). "Edit This Page; Is it the end of Wikipedia". Boston Review.  ^ Cohen, Noam (March 28, 2009). "Wikipedia – Exploring Fact City". The New York Times. Retrieved April 19, 2011.  ^ Austin Gibbons, David Vetrano, Susan Biancani (2012). Wikipedia: Nowhere to grow ^ Jenny Kleeman (November 26, 2009). "Wikipedia falling victim to a war of words". The Guardian. London. Retrieved March 31, 2010.  ^ "Wikipedia: A quantitative analysis". Archived from the original (PDF) on April 3, 2012.  ^ Volunteers Log Off as Wikipedia Ages, The Wall Street Journal, November 27, 2009. ^ Barnett, Emma (November 26, 2009). "Wikipedia's Jimmy Wales denies site is 'losing' thousands of volunteer editors". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved March 31, 2010.  ^ a b Kevin Rawlinson (August 8, 2011). "Wikipedia seeks women to balance its 'geeky' editors". The Independent. Retrieved April 5, 2012.  ^ a b c d e Simonite, Tom (October 22, 2013). "The Decline of Wikipedia". MIT Technology Review. Retrieved November 30, 2013.  ^ "3 Charts That Show How Wikipedia Is Running Out of Admins". The Atlantic. July 16, 2012.  ^ Ward, Katherine. New York Magazine, issue of November 25, 2013, p. 18. ^ "Wikipedia Breaks Into US Top 10 Sites". PCWorld. February 17, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedia.org Site Overview". alexa.com. Retrieved December 4, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia Traffic Analysis Report – Wikipedia Page Views Per Country". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 8, 2015.  ^ Netburn, Deborah (January 19, 2012). "Wikipedia: SOPA protest led 8 million to look up reps in Congress". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved March 6, 2012.  ^ "Wikipedia joins blackout protest at US anti-piracy moves". BBC News. January 18, 2012. Retrieved January 19, 2012.  ^ "SOPA/Blackoutpage". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved January 19, 2012.  ^ Jeff Loveland and Joseph Reagle (January 15, 2013). "Wikipedia and encyclopedic production. New Media & Society. Sage Journals". New Media & Society. 15 (8): 1294. doi:10.1177/1461444812470428.  ^ Rebecca J. Rosen (January 30, 2013). "What If the Great Wikipedia 'Revolution' Was Actually a Reversion? • The Atlantic". Retrieved February 9, 2013.  ^ a b c Varma, Subodh (January 20, 2014). "Google eating into Wikipedia page views?". The Economic Times. Times Internet Limited. Retrieved February 10, 2014.  ^ "Alexa Top 500 Global Sites". Alexa Internet. Retrieved December 28, 2016.  ^ a b "Wikipedia Statistics (English)". stats.wikimedia.org.  ^ a b Zittrain, Jonathan (2008). The Future of the Internet and How to Stop It – Chapter 6: The Lessons of Wikipedia. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-12487-3. Archived from the original on February 16, 2009. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Registration notes ^ Protection Policy ^ Hafner, Katie (June 17, 2006). "Growing Wikipedia Refines Its 'Anyone Can Edit' Policy". The New York Times. Retrieved December 5, 2016.  ^ English Wikipedia's protection policy ^ English Wikipedia's full protection policy ^ a b Birken, P. (December 14, 2008). "Bericht Gesichtete Versionen". Wikide-l (Mailing list) (in German). Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved February 15, 2009.  ^ William Henderson (December 10, 2012). "Wikipedia Has Figured Out A New Way To Stop Vandals In Their Tracks". Business Insider.  ^ Frewin, Jonathan (June 15, 2010). "Wikipedia unlocks divisive pages for editing". BBC News. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ a b Kleinz, Torsten (February 2005). "World of Knowledge" (PDF). Linux Magazine. Retrieved July 13, 2007. The Wikipedia's open structure makes it a target for trolls and vandals who malevolently add incorrect information to articles, get other people tied up in endless discussions, and generally do everything to draw attention to themselves.  ^ Wikipedia:New pages patrol ^ Andrea Ciffolilli, "Phantom authority, self-selective recruitment and retention of members in virtual communities: The case of Wikipedia" Archived December 6, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., First Monday December 2003. ^ West, Andrew G.; Chang, Jian; Venkatasubramanian, Krishna; Sokolsky, Oleg; Lee, Insup (2011). Link Spamming Wikipedia for Profit. 8th Annual Collaboration, Electronic Messaging, Anti-Abuse, and Spam Conference. pp. 152–161. doi:10.1145/2030376.2030394.  ^ Vandalism. Wikipedia. Retrieved November 6, 2012. ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin Wattenberg; Kushal Dave (2004). "Studying Cooperation and Conflict between Authors with History Flow Visualizations" (PDF). Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI). Vienna, Austria: ACM SIGCHI: 575–582. doi:10.1145/985921.985953. ISBN 1-58113-702-8. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 25, 2006. Retrieved January 24, 2007.  ^ Reid Priedhorsky; Jilin Chen; Shyong (Tony) K. Lam; Katherine Panciera; Loren Terveen; John Riedl (November 4, 2007). "Creating, Destroying, and Restoring Value in Wikipedia" (PDF). Association for Computing Machinery GROUP '07 conference proceedings; GroupLens Research, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota. Sanibel Island, Florida. Retrieved October 13, 2007.  ^ a b c d Seigenthaler, John (November 29, 2005). "A False Wikipedia 'biography'". USA Today. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Friedman, Thomas L. (2007). The World is Flat. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. p. 124. ISBN 978-0-374-29278-2.  ^ Buchanan, Brian (November 17, 2006). "Founder shares cautionary tale of libel in cyberspace". archive.firstamendmentcenter.org. Archived from the original on December 21, 2012. Retrieved November 17, 2012.  ^ Helm, Burt (December 13, 2005). "Wikipedia: "A Work in Progress"". BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012. Retrieved July 26, 2012.  ^ "Who's behind Wikipedia?". PC World. February 6, 2008. Archived from the original on February 9, 2008. Retrieved February 7, 2008.  ^ What Wikipedia is not. Retrieved April 1, 2010. "Wikipedia is not a dictionary, usage, or jargon guide." ^ Notability. Retrieved February 13, 2008. "A topic is presumed to be notable if it has received significant coverage in reliable secondary sources that are independent of the subject." ^ No original research. February 13, 2008. "Wikipedia does not publish original thought." ^ Verifiability. February 13, 2008. "Material challenged or likely to be challenged, and all quotations, must be attributed to a reliable, published source." ^ Cohen, Noam (August 9, 2011). "For inclusive mission, Wikipedia is told that written word goes only so far". International Herald Tribune. p. 18. Archived from the original on March 11, 2014 – via vLex. (subscription required) ^ Neutral point of view. February 13, 2008. "All Wikipedia articles and other encyclopedic content must be written from a neutral point of view, representing significant views fairly, proportionately and without bias." ^ Eric Haas (October 26, 2007). "Will Unethical Editing Destroy Wikipedia's Credibility?". AlterNet. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Sanger, Larry (April 18, 2005). "The Early History of Nupedia and Wikipedia: A Memoir". Slashdot. Dice.  ^ Kostakis, Vasilis (March 2010). "Identifying and understanding the problems of Wikipedia's peer governance: The case of inclusionists versus deletionists". First Monday.  ^ Ownership of articles ^ Avoiding Tragedy in the Wiki-Commons, by Andrew George, 12 Va. J.L. & Tech. 8 (2007) ^ Wikipedia:Administrators ^ Mehegan, David (February 13, 2006). "Many contributors, common cause". Boston Globe. Retrieved March 25, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedia:Administrators". Retrieved July 12, 2009.  ^ "Wikipedia:RfA_Review/Reflect". Retrieved September 24, 2009.  ^ Meyer, Robinson (July 16, 2012). "3 Charts That Show How Wikipedia Is Running Out of Admins". The Atlantic. Retrieved September 2, 2012.  ^ Dispute Resolution ^ Coldewey, Devin (June 21, 2012). "Wikipedia is editorial warzone, says study". Technology. NBC News. Retrieved October 29, 2012.  ^ David A. Hoffman; Salil K. Mehra (2009). "Wikitruth through Wikiorder". Emory Law Journal (PDF)|format= requires |url= (help). Emory University School of Law. 59 (1): 181. SSRN 1354424.  ^ David A. Hoffman; Salil K. Mehra (2009). "Wikitruth through Wikiorder". Emory Law Journal (PDF)|format= requires |url= (help). Emory University School of Law. 59 (1): 151–210. SSRN 1354424.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin M. Wattenberg; Jesse Kriss; Frank van Ham (January 3, 2007). "Talk Before You Type: Coordination in Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved June 27, 2008.  ^ Arthur, Charles (December 15, 2005). "Log on and join in, but beware the web cults". The Guardian. London. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Lu Stout, Kristie (August 4, 2003). "Wikipedia: The know-it-all Web site". CNN. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Larry Sanger (December 31, 2004). "Why Wikipedia Must Jettison Its Anti-Elitism". Kuro5hin, Op–Ed. There is a certain mindset associated with unmoderated Usenet groups […] that infects the collectively-managed Wikipedia project: if you react strongly to trolling, that reflects poorly on you, not (necessarily) on the troll. If you […] demand that something be done about constant disruption by trollish behavior, the other listmembers will cry "censorship", attack you, and even come to the defense of the troll. […] The root problem: anti-elitism, or lack of respect for expertise. There is a deeper problem […] which explains both of the above-elaborated problems. Namely, as a community, Wikipedia lacks the habit or tradition of respect for expertise. As a community, far from being elitist, it is anti-elitist (which, in this context, means that expertise is not accorded any special respect, and snubs and disrespect of expertise is tolerated). This is one of my failures: a policy that I attempted to institute in Wikipedia's first year, but for which I did not muster adequate support, was the policy of respecting and deferring politely to experts. (Those who were there will, I hope, remember that I tried very hard.)  ^ T. Kriplean, I. Beschastnikh, et al. (2008). "Articulations of wikiwork: uncovering valued work in Wikipedia through barnstars". Proceedings of the ACM: 47. doi:10.1145/1460563.1460573. ISBN 978-1-60558-007-4.  (Subscription required.) ^ Jean Goodwin (2009). "The Authority of Wikipedia" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on November 22, 2009. Retrieved January 31, 2011. Wikipedia's commitment to anonymity/pseudonymity thus imposes a sort of epistemic agnosticism on its readers  ^ Kittur, Aniket. "Power of the Few vs. Wisdom of the Crowd: Wikipedia and the Rise of the Bourgeoisie" (PDF). Viktoria Institute. Retrieved August 13, 2014.  ^ a b c Blodget, Henry (January 3, 2009). "Who The Hell Writes Wikipedia, Anyway?". Business Insider.  ^ Wilson, Chris (February 22, 2008). "The Wisdom of the Chaperones". Slate. Retrieved August 13, 2014.  ^ Swartz, Aaron (September 4, 2006). "Raw Thought: Who Writes Wikipedia?". Retrieved February 23, 2008.  ^ a b Goldman, Eric. "Wikipedia's Labor Squeeze and its Consequences". 8. Journal on Telecommunications and High Technology Law.  ^ Noveck, Beth Simone. "Wikipedia and the Future of Legal Education". 57. Journal of Legal Education.  ^ "Wikipedia "Good Samaritans" Are on the Money". Scientific American. October 19, 2007. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Yair Amichai–Hamburger, Naama Lamdan, Rinat Madiel, Tsahi Hayat, Personality Characteristics of Wikipedia Members, CyberPsychology & Behavior, December 1, 2008, 11 (6): 679–681; doi:10.1089/cpb.2007.0225. ^ "Wikipedians are 'closed' and 'disagreeable'". New Scientist. Retrieved July 13, 2010.  (Subscription required.) ^ "The Misunderstood Personality Profile of Wikipedia Members". psychologytoday.com. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Giles, Jim (August 4, 2009). "After the boom, is Wikipedia heading for bust?". New Scientist.  ^ "Where Are the Women in Wikipedia? – Room for Debate". NYTimes.com. February 2, 2011. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Lam, Shyong; Anuradha Uduwage; Zhenhua Dong; Shilad Sen; David R. Musicant; Loren Terveen; John Riedl (October 3–5, 2011). "WP:Clubhouse? An Exploration of Wikipedia's Gender Imbalance" (PDF). WikiSym 2011. Retrieved October 28, 2013.  ^ Cohen, Noam. "Define Gender Gap? Look Up Wikipedia's Contributor List". The New York Times. The New York Times Company. Retrieved October 28, 2013.  ^ Chom, Noam (January 31, 2011). "Define Gender Gap? Look Up Wikipedia's Contributor List". The New York Times. p. B–1. Retrieved May 9, 2012.  ^ Basch, Linda (February 6, 2011). "Male-Dominated Web Site Seeking Female Experts" (Letters to the Editor). The New York Times. p. WK–7. Retrieved May 9, 2012.  ^ "OCAD to 'Storm Wikipedia' this fall". CBC News. August 27, 2013. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ Wikimedia Foundation. 2008. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on November 18, 2016. Retrieved December 27, 2016.  ^ "Wikipedia 'completely failed' to fix gender imbalance". BBC News. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Dimitra Kessenides (December 26, 2017). Bloomberg News Weekly, "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". p. 73. ^ "Statistics". English Wikipedia. Retrieved June 21, 2008.  ^ List of Wikipedias ^ "Wikipedia:List of Wikipedias". English Wikipedia. Retrieved April 26, 2017.  ^ List of Wikipedias – Meta ^ "List of Wikipedias". Wikimedia Meta-Wiki. Retrieved 26 April 2017.  ^ "Spelling". Manual of Style. Wikipedia. Retrieved May 19, 2007.  ^ "Countering systemic bias". Retrieved May 19, 2007.  ^ "Fair use". Meta-Wiki. Retrieved July 14, 2007.  ^ "Images on Wikipedia". Retrieved July 14, 2007.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas (January 3, 2007). "The Visual Side of Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved October 30, 2007.  ^ Jimmy Wales, "Wikipedia is an encyclopedia", March 8, 2005, <Wikipedia-l@wikimedia.org> ^ "Meta-Wiki". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 24, 2009.  ^ "Meta-Wiki Statistics". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 24, 2008.  ^ "List of articles every Wikipedia should have". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved March 24, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia: Translation". English Wikipedia. Retrieved February 3, 2007.  ^ Yasseri, Taha; Sumi, Robert; Kertész, János (January 17, 2012). "Circadian Patterns of Wikipedia Editorial Activity: A Demographic Analysis". PLoS ONE. 7 (1): e30091. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0030091. Retrieved January 17, 2012.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation 2011–12 Annual Plan" (PDF). Wikimedia Foundation. p. 8. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ a b c "The future of Wikipedia: WikiPeaks?". The Economist. March 1, 2014. Retrieved March 11, 2014.  ^ Andrew Lih. Wikipedia. Alternative edit policies at Wikipedia in other languages. ^ Jemielniak, Dariusz (June 22, 2014). "The Unbearable Bureaucracy of Wikipedia". Slate. Retrieved August 18, 2014.  ^ D. Jemielniak, Common Knowledge, Stanford University Press, 2014. ^ Messer-Kruse, Timothy (February 12, 2012) The 'Undue Weight' of Truth on Wikipedia Archived December 18, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. The Chronicle of Higher Education Retrieved March 27, 2014 ^ Colón-Aguirre, Monica &Fleming-May, Rachel A. (October 11, 2012) "You Just Type in What You Are Looking For": Undergraduates' Use of Library Resources vs. Wikipedia Archived April 19, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. (p. 392) The Journal of Academic Librarianship Retrieved March 27, 2014 ^ Bowling Green News (February 27, 2012) Wikipedia experience sparks national debate Archived August 27, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Bowling Green State University Retrieved March 27, 2014 ^ Wisdom? More like dumbness of the crowds | Oliver Kamm – Times Online (archive version 2011-08-14) (Author's own copy Archived September 5, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.) ^ "Plagiarism by Wikipedia editors". Wikipedia Watch. October 27, 2006. Archived from the original on November 25, 2009.  ^ "Wikipedia, Britannica: A Toss-Up". Wired. Associated Press. December 15, 2005. Retrieved August 8, 2015.  ^ Reagle, pp. 165–166. ^ Fatally Flawed: Refuting the recent study on encyclopedic accuracy by the journal Nature Archived July 9, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., Encyclopædia Britannica, March 2006 ^ "Encyclopaedia Britannica and Nature: a response" (PDF). Retrieved July 13, 2010.  ^ "Nature's responses to Encyclopaedia Britannica". Nature. March 30, 2006. Retrieved March 19, 2012.  ^ See author acknowledged comments in response to the citation of the Nature study, at PLoS One, 2014, "Citation of fundamentally flawed Nature quality 'study' ", In response to T. Yasseri et al. (2012) Dynamics of Conflicts in Wikipedia, Published June 20, 2012, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0038869, see "Archived copy". Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2014. , accessed July 21, 2014. ^ "Wikipedia:General disclaimer". English Wikipedia. Retrieved April 22, 2008.  ^ Public Information Research, Wikipedia Watch ^ Raphel, JR. "The 15 Biggest Wikipedia Blunders". PC World. Retrieved September 2, 2009.  ^ Cowen, Tyler (March 14, 2008). "Cooked Books". The New Republic. Archived from the original on March 18, 2008. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Stacy Schiff (July 31, 2006). "Know It All". The New Yorker.  ^ Danah Boyd (January 4, 2005). "Academia and Wikipedia". Many 2 Many: A Group Weblog on Social Software. Corante. Retrieved December 18, 2008. [The author, Danah Boyd, describes herself as] an expert on social media[,] […] a doctoral student in the School of Information at the University of California, Berkeley [,] and a fellow at the Harvard University Berkman Center for Internet & Society [at Harvard Law School.]  ^ Robert McHenry, "The Faith-Based Encyclopedia" Archived January 16, 2006, at the Wayback Machine., Tech Central Station, November 15, 2004. ^ "Inside Wikipedia – Attack of the PR Industry". Deutsche Welle. June 30, 2014. Retrieved July 2, 2014.  ^ "Toward a New Compendium of Knowledge (longer version)". Citizendium. Archived from the original on October 11, 2006. Retrieved October 10, 2006.  ^ a b Elder, Jeff (June 16, 2014). "Wikipedia Strengthens Rules Against Undisclosed Editing". The Wall Street Journal.  ^ Ahrens, Frank (July 9, 2006). "Death by Wikipedia: The Kenneth Lay Chronicles". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 1, 2006.  ^ Kane, Margaret (January 30, 2006). "Politicians notice Wikipedia". CNET. Retrieved January 28, 2007.  ^ Bergstein, Brian (January 23, 2007). "Microsoft offers cash for Wikipedia edit". MSNBC. Retrieved February 1, 2007.  ^ Hafner, Katie (August 19, 2007). "Lifting Corporate Fingerprints From the Editing of Wikipedia". The New York Times. p. 1. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ a b Stephen Colbert (July 30, 2006). "Wikiality". Retrieved October 8, 2015.  ^ "Wide World of Wikipedia". The Emory Wheel. April 21, 2006. Archived from the original on November 7, 2007. Retrieved October 17, 2007.  ^ Waters, N. L. (2007). "Why you can't cite Wikipedia in my class". Communications of the ACM. 50 (9): 15. doi:10.1145/1284621.1284635.  ^ Jaschik, Scott (January 26, 2007). "A Stand Against Wikipedia". Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved January 27, 2007.  ^ Helm, Burt (December 14, 2005). "Wikipedia: 'A Work in Progress'". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on April 21, 2012. Retrieved January 29, 2007.  ^ "Jimmy Wales", Biography Resource Center Online. (Gale, 2006.) ^ Child, Maxwell L., "Professors Split on Wiki Debate" Archived December 20, 2008, at the Wayback Machine., The Harvard Crimson, Monday, February 26, 2007. ^ Chloe Stothart. "Web threatens learning ethos" Archived December 21, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.. The Times Higher Education Supplement, 2007, 1799 (June 22), p. 2. ^ Cohen, Morris; Olson, Kent (2010). Legal Research in a Nutshell (10th ed.). St. Paul, Minnesota, USA: Thomson Reuters. pp. 32–34. ISBN 978-0-314-26408-4.  ^ a b Julie Beck. "Doctors' #1 Source for Healthcare Information: Wikipedia". The Atlantic, March 5, 2014. ^ a b Green, Emma (May 7, 2014). "Can Wikipedia Ever Be a Definitive Medical Text? – Julie Beck". The Atlantic. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Kittur, Aniket; Kraut, Robert E. (2008). "Harnessing the wisdom of crowds in Wikipedia: quality through coordination". Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work. New York: ACM. pp. 37–46. doi:10.1145/1460563.1460572. ISBN 978-1-60558-007-4. [permanent dead link] ^ a b Roy Rosenzweig (June 2006). "Can History be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the Past". The Journal of American History. 93 (1): 117–146. doi:10.2307/4486062. JSTOR 4486062. Archived from the original on April 25, 2010. Retrieved August 11, 2006.  (Center for History and New Media.) ^ Andrew Orlowski (October 18, 2005). "Wikipedia founder admits to serious quality problems". The Register. Retrieved September 30, 2007.  ^ "Cancer information on Wikipedia is accurate, but not very readable, study finds". Science Daily. June 2, 2010. Retrieved December 31, 2010.  ^ "Fact or fiction? Wikipedia's variety of contributors is not only a strength". The Economist. March 10, 2007. Retrieved December 31, 2010.  ^ Wikipedia:PAPER ^ "The battle for Wikipedia's soul". The Economist. March 6, 2008. Retrieved March 7, 2008.  ^ Douglas, Ian (November 10, 2007). "Wikipedia: an online encyclopedia torn apart". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved November 23, 2010.  ^ Sophie Taylor (April 5, 2008). "China allows access to English Wikipedia". Reuters. Retrieved July 29, 2008.  ^ Bruilliard, Karin (May 21, 2010). "Pakistan blocks YouTube a day after shutdown of Facebook over Muhammad issue". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 24, 2011.  ^ "Wikipedia child image censored". BBC News. December 8, 2008. Retrieved December 8, 2008.  ^ a b Kittur, A., Chi, E. H., and Suh, B. 2009. What's in Wikipedia? Mapping Topics and Conflict Using Socially Annotated Category Structure Archived April 13, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. In Proceedings of the 27th international Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Boston, Massachusetts, USA, April 4–9, 2009). CHI '09. ACM, New York, USA, 1509–1512. ^ Petrusich, Amanda (October 20, 2011). "Wikipedia's Deep Dive Into a Library Collection". The New York Times. Retrieved October 28, 2011.  ^ Lam, Shyong; Anuradha Uduwage; Zhenhua Dong; Shilad Sen; David R. Musicant; Loren Terveen; John Riedl (October 3–5, 2011). "WP: Clubhouse? An Exploration of Wikipedia's Gender Imblance" (PDF). WikiSym 2011: 4.  ^ Mark Graham, Mapping the Geographies of Wikipedia Content, Zerogeography.net (November 12, 2009). ^ The Guardian 2014 (London) The Guardian view on Wikipedia: evolving truth Archived November 12, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. ^ a b Quilter, Laura (October 24, 2012). "Systemic Bias in Wikipedia: What It Looks Like, and How to Deal with It". University of Massachusetts – Amherst. Retrieved November 26, 2012.  ^ "Edit Wars Reveal the 10 Most Controversial Topics on Wikipedia[permanent dead link]", MIT Technology Review, July 17, 2013. ^ a b c "The Most Controversial Topics in Wikipedia: A Multilingual and Geographical Analysis by Taha Yasseri, Anselm Spoerri, Mark Graham, Janos Kertesz :: SSRN". Papers.ssrn.com. May 23, 2013. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2269392. SSRN 2269392.  Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ Das, Sanmay; Allen, Lavoie; Malik, Magdon-Ismail (November 1, 2013). "Manipulation among the arbiters of collective intelligence: How Wikipedia administrators mold public opinion". CIKM '13 Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on Information & Knowledge Management. San Francisco, California, USA: ACM. pp. 1097–1106. doi:10.1145/2505515.2505566. ISBN 978-1-4503-2263-8.  ^ Das, Sanmay; Allen, Lavoie; Malik, Magdon-Ismail (December 24, 2016). "Manipulation among the arbiters of collective intelligence: How Wikipedia administrators mold public opinion.". ACM Transactions on the Web. New York, NY, USA: ACM. 10 (4): 24. doi:10.1145/3001937.  ^ a b Dimitra Kessenides (December 22, 2016). "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". Bloomberg News Weekly. p. 72. Retrieved December 26, 2016.  ^ Sanger, Larry. "What should we do about Wikipedia's porn problem?". Retrieved July 26, 2012.  ^ Metz, Cade (December 7, 2008). "Brit ISPs censor Wikipedia over 'child porn' album cover". The Register. Retrieved May 10, 2009.  ^ Raphael, JR (December 10, 2008). "Wikipedia Censorship Sparks Free Speech Debate". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 10, 2009.  ^ Farrell, Nick (April 29, 2010). "Wikipedia denies child abuse allegations: Co-founder grassed the outfit to the FBI". The Inquirer. Retrieved October 9, 2010.  ^ a b Metz, Cade (April 9, 2010). "Wikifounder reports Wikiparent to FBI over 'child porn'". The Register. Retrieved April 19, 2010.  ^ "Wikipedia blasts co-founder's accusations of child porn on website". The Economic Times. India. April 29, 2010. Retrieved April 29, 2010.  ^ a b "Wikipedia blasts talk of child porn at website". Agence France-Presse. April 28, 2010. Retrieved April 29, 2010.  ^ "Wikimedia pornography row deepens as Wales cedes rights". BBC News. May 10, 2010. Retrieved May 19, 2010.  ^ Gray, Lila (September 17, 2013). "Wikipedia Gives Porn a Break". XBIZ.com. Retrieved November 10, 2013.  ^ Andrew McStay, 2014, Privacy and Philosophy: New Media and Affective Protocol Archived April 14, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., New York Peter Lang. ^ Heise – Gericht weist einstweilige Verfügung gegen Wikimedia Deutschland ab (update), by Torsten Kleinz, February 9, 2006. ^ "IT Service Management Software". OTRS.com. Retrieved June 9, 2012.  ^ Paling, Emma. "Wikipedia's Hostility to Women". The Atlantic. Retrieved October 24, 2015.  ^ Auerbach, David. "Encyclopedia Frown". Slate. Retrieved October 24, 2015.  ^ "In UK, rising chorus of outrage over online misogyny". CSMonitor.com.  ^ Paling, Emma (October 21, 2015). "Wikipedia's Hostility to Women". The Atlantic. Retrieved December 10, 2016.  ^ Ayers, Phoebe (2008). How Wikipedia Works. San Francisco: No Starch Press. p. 213. ISBN 1-59327-176-X.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation – Financial Statements – June 30, 2011 and 2010" (PDF). Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ "Wikimedia Foundation IRS Form 990" (PDF). Retrieved October 14, 2014.  ^ "Press releases/WMF announces new ED Lila Tretikov". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ a b Jeff Elder, The Wall Street Journal, May 1, 2014, "Wikipedia's New Chief: From Soviet Union to World's Sixth-Largest Site". ^ a b Naom Cohen (May 1, 2014). "Media: Open-Source Software Specialist Selected as Executive Director of Wikipedia". The New York Times.  ^ Dimitra Kessenides. Bloomberg News Weekly. December 26, 2016. "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". ^ Dimitra Kessenides. Bloomberg News Weekly. December 26, 2016, p. 74. "Is Wikipedia 'Woke'". ^ Mark Bergsma. "Wikimedia Architecture" (PDF). Wikimedia Foundation. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 3, 2009. Retrieved June 27, 2008.  ^ "Version: Installed extensions". . Retrieved August 18, 2014. ^ Michael Snow. "Lucene search: Internal search function returns to service". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved February 26, 2009.  ^ Brion Vibber. "[Wikitech-l] Lucene search". Retrieved February 26, 2009.  ^ "Extension:Lucene-search". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved August 31, 2009.  ^ "mediawiki – Revision 55688: /branches/lucene-search-2.1/lib". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved August 31, 2009.  ^ Emil Protalinski (July 2, 2013). "Wikimedia rolls out WYSIWYG visual editor for logged-in users accessing Wikipedia articles in English". The Next Web. Retrieved July 6, 2013.  ^ Curtis, Sophie (July 23, 2013). "Wikipedia introduces new features to entice editors". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved August 18, 2013.  ^ L.M. (December 13, 2011). "Changes at Wikipedia: Seeing things". The Economist. Retrieved July 28, 2013.  ^ Lucian Parfeni (July 2, 2013). "Wikipedia's New VisualEditor Is the Best Update in Years and You Can Make It Better". Softpedia. Retrieved July 30, 2013.  ^ a b Orlowski, Andrew (August 1, 2013). "Wikipedians say no to Jimmy's 'buggy' WYSIWYG editor". The Register. Retrieved August 18, 2013.  ^ Wikipedia Bot Information ^ a b Daniel Nasaw (July 24, 2012). "Meet the 'bots' that edit Wikipedia". BBC News.  ^ Halliday, Josh; Arthur, Charles (July 26, 2012). "Boot up: The Wikipedia vandalism police, Apple analysts, and more". The Guardian. Retrieved September 5, 2012.  ^ Jervell, Ellen Emmerentze (July 13, 2014). "For This Author, 10,000 Wikipedia Articles Is a Good Day's Work". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 18, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia signpost: Abuse Filter is enabled". English Wikipedia. March 23, 2009. Retrieved July 13, 2010.  ^ Aljazeera, July 21, 2014, "MH17 Wikipedia entry edited from Russian Government IP Address". "Archived copy". Archived from the original on November 16, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2014.  ^ Wikipedia's policy on bots ^ Andrew Lih (2009). The Wikipedia Revolution, chapter Then came the Bots, pp. 99–106. ^ "Wikipedia: Wikiprojects". Retrieved 16 March 2015.  ^ "Wikipedia:Version 1.0 Editorial Team/Assessment". Retrieved 28 October 2007.  ^ "Comparing featured article groups and revision patterns correlations in Wikipedia". First Monday. Retrieved 13 July 2010.  ^ Fernanda B. Viégas; Martin Wattenberg; Matthew M. McKeon (22 July 2007). "The Hidden Order of Wikipedia" (PDF). Visual Communication Lab, IBM Research. Retrieved 30 October 2007.  ^ Poderi, Giacomo, Wikipedia and the Featured Articles: How a Technological System Can Produce Best Quality Articles, Master thesis, University of Maastricht, October 2008. ^ Lindsey, David (5 April 2010). "Evaluating quality control of Wikipedia's featured articles". First Monday. 15 (4). Retrieved 29 January 2017.  ^ a b Wikipedia:Version 1.0 Editorial Team/Statistics – Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia ^ "Monthly request statistics", Wikimedia. Retrieved October 31, 2008.[dead link] ^ Domas Mituzas. "Wikipedia: Site internals, configuration, code examples and management issues" (PDF). MySQL Users Conference 2007. Retrieved June 27, 2008.  ^ Guido Urdaneta, Guillaume Pierre and Maarten van Steen. "Wikipedia Workload Analysis for Decentralized Hosting". Elsevier Computer Networks 53 (11), pp. 1830–1845, June 2009. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Weiss, Todd R. (October 9, 2008). "Wikipedia simplifies IT infrastructure by moving to one Linux vendor". Computerworld. Retrieved November 1, 2008.  ^ Paul, Ryan (October 9, 2008). "Wikipedia adopts Ubuntu for its server infrastructure". Ars Technica. Retrieved November 1, 2008.  ^ "Server roles at wikitech.wikimedia.org". Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved December 8, 2009.  ^ Palmier, Guillaume. "Wikimedia sites to move to primary data center in Ashburn, Virginia". WMF. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Verge, Jason. "It's Official: Ashburn is Wikipedia's New Home". Data Center Knowledge. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ Frederic M. Scherer and David Ross, [1970] 1990. Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance, 3rd ed. Houghton-Mifflin. Description Archived May 3, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. and 1st ed. review extract[dead link].    • Google Scholar search of Frederic M. Scherer ^ a b c Patents, Citations, and Innovations, by Adam B. Jaffe, Manuel Trajtenberg, pp. 89–153. ^ Cohen, Noam (March 5, 2007). "A Contributor to Wikipedia Has His Fictional Side". The New York Times. Retrieved October 18, 2008.  ^ Wikipedia:Copyrights ^ Walter Vermeir (2007). "Resolution:License update". Wikizine. Retrieved December 4, 2007.  ^ Wikimedia ^ "Licensing update/Questions and Answers". Wikimedia Meta. Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved February 15, 2009.  ^ "Licensing_update/Timeline". Wikimedia Meta. Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved April 5, 2009.  ^ "Wikimedia community approves license migration". Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved May 21, 2009.  ^ Cohen, Noam (July 19, 2009). "Wikipedia May Be a Font of Facts, but It's a Desert for Photos". New York Times. Retrieved March 9, 2013.  ^ "Wikipedia cleared in French defamation case". Reuters. November 2, 2007. Retrieved November 2, 2007.  ^ Anderson, Nate (May 2, 2008). "Dumb idea: suing Wikipedia for calling you "dumb"". Ars Technica. Retrieved May 4, 2008.  ^ "With Bing Reference". Archived from the original on March 8, 2013. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia on DVD" Archived June 3, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.. Linterweb. Retrieved June 1, 2007. "Linterweb is authorized to make a commercial use of the Wikipedia trademark restricted to the selling of the Encyclopedia CDs and DVDs". ^ "Wikipedia 0.5 Available on a CD-ROM" Archived May 3, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.. Wikipedia on DVD. Linterweb. "The DVD or CD-ROM version 0.5 was commercially available for purchase." Retrieved June 1, 2007. ^ "Polish Wikipedia on DVD". Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Wikipedia:DVD". Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "CDPedia (Python Argentina)". Retrieved July 7, 2011.  ^ Wikipedia CD Selection. Retrieved September 8, 2009. ^ "Wikipedia turned into book". The Daily Telegraph. London: Telegraph Media Group. June 16, 2009. Archived from the original on September 9, 2009. Retrieved September 8, 2009.  ^ "Wikipedia Selection for Schools". Retrieved July 14, 2012.  ^ Thiel, Thomas (September 27, 2010). "Wikipedia und Amazon: Der Marketplace soll es richten". Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (in German). Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung. Archived from the original on November 26, 2010. Retrieved December 6, 2010.  ^ Wikipedia policies on data download ^ Data dumps: Downloading Images, Wikimedia Meta-Wiki ^ "Wikipedia Reference Desk". Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Brad Stone, "How Google's Android chief, Sundar Pichai, became the most powerful man in mobile", June 30 – July 6, 2014, Bloomberg BusinessWeek, pp. 47–51. ^ "Wikipedia – Android Apps on Google Play". Play.Google.com. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia Mobile on the App Store on iTunes". iTunes.Apple.com. August 4, 2014. Retrieved August 21, 2014.  ^ "Wikimedia Mobile is Officially Launched". Wikimedia Technical Blog. June 30, 2009. Retrieved July 22, 2009.  ^ "Local Points Of Interest In Wikipedia". May 15, 2011. Retrieved May 15, 2011.  ^ "iPhone Gems: Wikipedia Apps". November 30, 2008. Retrieved July 22, 2008.  ^ Ellis, Justin (January 17, 2013). "Wikipedia plans to expand mobile access around the globe with new funding". NiemanLab. Nieman Journalism Lab. Retrieved April 22, 2013.  ^ Andrew Lih (June 20, 2015). "Can Wikipedia Survive?".  ^ Andrew Brown (June 25, 2015). "Wikipedia editors are a dying breed. The reason? Mobile". The Guardian.  ^ "Wikipedia:Modelling Wikipedia's growth". Retrieved December 22, 2007.  ^ "694 Million People Currently Use the Internet Worldwide According To comScore Networks". comScore. May 4, 2006. Archived from the original on July 30, 2008. Retrieved December 16, 2007. Wikipedia has emerged as a site that continues to increase in popularity, both globally and in the US  ^ "Google Traffic To Wikipedia up 166% Year over Year". Hitwise. February 16, 2007. Retrieved December 22, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedia and Academic Research". Hitwise. October 17, 2006. Retrieved February 6, 2008.  ^ West, Stuart. "Wikipedia's Evolving Impact: slideshow presentation at TED2010" (PDF). Retrieved October 23, 2015.  ^ Rainie, Lee; Bill Tancer (December 15, 2007). "Wikipedia users" (PDF). Pew Internet & American Life Project. Pew Research Center. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 6, 2008. Retrieved December 15, 2007. 36% of online American adults consult Wikipedia. It is particularly popular with the well-educated and current college-age students.  ^ SAI (October 7, 2011). "The World's Most Valuable Startups". Business Insider. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ "Research:Wikipedia Readership Survey 2011/Results – Meta". Wikimedia. February 6, 2012. Retrieved April 16, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia:Wikipedia in the media". Wikipedia. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Bourgeois et al. v. Peters et al." (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on February 3, 2007. Retrieved February 6, 2007.  ^ "Wikipedian Justice" (PDF)|format= requires |url= (help). SSRN 1346311.  Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ "LEGISinfo – House Government Bill C-38 (38–1)". Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Arias, Martha L. (January 29, 2007). "Wikipedia: The Free Online Encyclopedia and its Use as Court Source". Internet Business Law Services. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  (The name "World Intellectual Property Office" should however read "World Intellectual Property Organization" in this source.) ^ Cohen, Noam (January 29, 2007). "Courts Turn to Wikipedia, but Selectively". The New York Times. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Aftergood, Steven (March 21, 2007). "The Wikipedia Factor in US Intelligence". Federation of American Scientists Project on Government Secrecy. Retrieved April 14, 2007.  ^ Butler, Declan (December 16, 2008). "Publish in Wikipedia or perish". Nature News. doi:10.1038/news.2008.1312.  ^ Shaw, Donna (February–March 2008). "Wikipedia in the Newsroom". American Journalism Review. Retrieved February 11, 2008.  ^ Lexington (September 24, 2011). "Classlessness in America: The uses and abuses of an enduring myth". The Economist. Retrieved September 27, 2011. Socialist Labour Party of America […] though it can trace its history as far back as 1876, when it was known as the Workingmen's Party, no less an authority than Wikipedia pronounces it "moribund".  ^ "Shizuoka newspaper plagiarized Wikipedia article". Japan News Review. July 5, 2007.  ^ "Express-News staffer resigns after plagiarism in column is discovered" at the Wayback Machine (archived October 15, 2007), San Antonio Express-News, January 9, 2007. ^ Frank Bridgewater. "Inquiry prompts reporter's dismissal". Honolulu Star-Bulletin. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Grossman, Lev (December 13, 2006). "Time's Person of the Year: You". Time. Time. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Radio 4 documentary, BBC". 2007. Retrieved April 24, 2016.  ^ "Comunicato stampa. On. Franco Grillini. Wikipedia. Interrogazione a Rutelli. Con "diritto di panorama" promuovere arte e architettura contemporanea italiana. Rivedere con urgenza legge copyright" [Press release. Honorable Franco Grillini. Wikipedia. Interview with Rutelli about the "right to view" promoting contemporary art and architecture of Italy. Review with urgency copyright law] (in Italian). October 12, 2007. Archived from the original on March 30, 2009. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Jose Antonio Vargas (September 17, 2007). "On Wikipedia, Debating 2008 Hopefuls' Every Facet". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ Jennifer Ablan (October 22, 2007). "Wikipedia page the latest status symbol". Reuters. Retrieved October 24, 2007.  ^ Witzleb, Normann (2009). "Engaging with the World: Students of Comparative Law Write for Wikipedia". 19 (1 and 2). Legal Education Review: 83–98.  ^ "AI Research Trends". One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI100). Stanford University. Retrieved September 3, 2016.  ^ "Trophy box", Meta-Wiki (March 28, 2005). ^ "Webby Awards 2004". The International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences. 2004. Archived from the original on July 22, 2011.  ^ Zumpano, Anthony (January 29, 2007). "Similar Search Results: Google Wins". Interbrand. Archived from the original on February 20, 2007. Retrieved January 28, 2007.  ^ "Die Quadriga – Award 2008". Retrieved December 26, 2008.  ^ "Erasmus Prize – Praemium Erasmianum". Praemium Erasmianum Foundation. Retrieved January 15, 2015.  ^ "Premio Princesa de Asturias de Cooperación Internacional 2015". Fundación Princesa de Asturias. Retrieved June 17, 2015.  ^ "Los fundadores de Wikipedia destacan la versión en asturiano" [The founders of Wikipedia highlight the Asturian version] (in Spanish). La Nueva España. Retrieved October 20, 2015.  ^ "Wikipedia Celebrates 750 Years Of American Independence". The Onion. July 26, 2006. Retrieved October 15, 2006.  ^ "'L.A. Law' Wikipedia Page Viewed 874 Times Today". The Onion. November 24, 2010.  ^ "The Office: The Negotiation, 3.19". April 5, 2007. Retrieved December 27, 2014.  ^ "'Office' fans, inspired by Michael Scott, flock to edit Wikipedia". USA Today. April 12, 2007. Retrieved December 12, 2014.  ^ Bakken, Janae. "My Number One Doctor"; Scrubs; ABC; December 6, 2007. ^ "Professor Wikipedia – CollegeHumor Video". CollegeHumor. November 17, 2009. Retrieved April 19, 2011.  ^ "Dilbert comic strip for 05/08/2009 from the official Dilbert comic strips archive". Universal Uclick. May 8, 2009. Retrieved March 10, 2013.  ^ "Interview With Nick Doody and Matt Kirshen". British Comedy Guide. Retrieved July 31, 2009.  ^ "Your Wikipedia Entries". Tosh.0. February 3, 2010. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ "Wikipedia Updates". Tosh.0. February 3, 2010. Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Emily Flake (August 23, 2013). "Manning/Wikipedia cartoon". Retrieved August 26, 2013.  ^ "The obstacles to reforming our prisons – The Times". thetimes.co.uk. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ "john julius norwich -Search – The Times". thetimes.co.uk. Retrieved June 5, 2016.  ^ "Announcement of Wiktionary's creation". meta.wikimedia.org. Retrieved July 14, 2012.  ^ "Our projects", Wikimedia Foundation. Retrieved January 24, 2007. ^ Bosman, Julie. "After 244 Years, Encyclopaedia Britannica Stops the Presses". The New York Times. Retrieved January 26, 2015.  ^ "Encyclopedia Britannica Dies At The Hands Of Wikipedia, Gizmocrazed.com (with statista infographic from NYTimes.com)". Gizmocrazed.com. March 20, 2012. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Christopher Caldwell (June 14, 2013). "A chapter in the Enlightenment closes". ft.com. Retrieved June 15, 2013. Bertelsmann did not resort to euphemism this week when it announced the end of the Brockhaus encyclopedia brand. Brockhaus had been publishing reference books for two centuries when the media group bought it in 2008. […] The internet has finished off Brockhaus altogether. […] What Germans like is Wikipedia.  ^ "The amorality of Web 2.0". Rough Type. October 3, 2005. Retrieved July 15, 2006.  ^ "Technical solutions: Wisdom of the crowds". Nature. Retrieved October 10, 2006.  ^ Alison Flood. "Alison Flood: Should traditional biography be buried alongside Shakespeare's breakfast?". The Guardian. Retrieved June 14, 2014.  ^ Rada Mihalcea and Andras Csomai (2007). Wikify! Linking Documents to Encyclopedic Knowledge Archived February 18, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. Proc. CIKM. ^ David Milne and Ian H. Witten (2008). Learning to link with Wikipedia. Proc. CIKM. ^ Sisay Fissaha Adafre and [Maarten de Rijke] (2005). Discovering missing links in Wikipedia Archived July 17, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.. Proc. LinkKDD. ^ "Wikipedia-Mining Algorithm Reveals World's Most Influential Universities: An algorithm's list of the most influential universities contains some surprising entries.". MIT Technology Review. December 7, 2015. Retrieved December 27, 2015.  ^ Marmow Shaw, Jessica (December 10, 2015). "Harvard is only the 3rd most influential university in the world, according to this list". MarketWatch. Retrieved December 27, 2015.  ^ a b Bothwell, Ellie (December 15, 2015). "Wikipedia Ranking of World Universities: the top 100. List ranks institutions by search engine results and Wikipedia appearances". Times Higher Education. Retrieved December 27, 2015.  ^ Heart Internet. "Website discussing the emulator of the Domesday Project User Interface". Retrieved September 9, 2014.  ^ Frauenfelder, Mark (November 21, 2000). "The next generation of online encyclopedias". CNN.com. Archived from the original on August 14, 2004.  ^ The Free Encyclopedia Project gnu.org (Archived January 3, 2012, at WebCite) ^ Orlowski, Andrew (September 18, 2006). "Wikipedia founder forks Wikipedia, More experts, less fiddling?". The Register. Retrieved June 27, 2007. Larry Sanger describes the Citizendium project as a "progressive or gradual fork", with the major difference that experts have the final say over edits.  ^ Lyman, Jay (September 20, 2006). "Wikipedia Co-Founder Planning New Expert-Authored Site". LinuxInsider. Retrieved June 27, 2007.  Notes ^ Many (but not all) of the glyphs featured are equivalent to the English letter W or sounds "wi", "wo" or "wa". See Wikipedia logo. ^ Registration is required for certain tasks such as editing protected pages, creating pages in the English Wikipedia, and uploading files. ^ For a user to be considered active in a given month, one or more actions have had to be made in said month. ^ Wikis are a type of website. The word "wiki" itself is from the Hawaiian word for "quick".[14] ^ As of 19:59, Wednesday, April 26, 2017 (UTC) ^ The procrastination principle dictates that you should wait for problems to arise before solving them. ^ Revisions with libelous content, criminal threats, or copyright infringements may be removed completely. ^ See for example the Biographies of Living Persons Noticeboard or Neutral Point of View Noticeboard, created to address content falling under their respective areas. ^ See "Libel" by David McHam for the legal distinction Further reading Academic studies Main article: Academic studies about Wikipedia Leitch, Thomas. Wikipedia U: Knowledge, authority, and a liberal education in the digital age (2014) Jensen, Richard. "Military History on the Electronic Frontier: Wikipedia Fights the War of 1812", The Journal of Military History 76#4 (October 2012): 523–556; online version. Yasseri, Taha; Robert Sumi; János Kertész (2012). Szolnoki, Attila, ed. "Circadian Patterns of Wikipedia Editorial Activity: A Demographic Analysis". PLoS ONE. 7 (1): e30091. arXiv:1109.1746. Bibcode:2012PLoSO...7E0091Y. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0030091. PMC 3260192. PMID 22272279.  Goldman, Eric (2010). "Wikipedia's Labor Squeeze and its Consequences". Journal of Telecommunications and High Technology Law. 8. SSRN 1458162#.  (A blog post by the author.) Nielsen, Finn (August 2007). "Scientific Citations in Wikipedia". First Monday. 12 (8). doi:10.5210/fm.v12i8.1997. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Pfeil, Ulrike; Panayiotis Zaphiris; Chee Siang Ang (2006). "Cultural Differences in Collaborative Authoring of Wikipedia". Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication. 12 (1): 88. doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2006.00316.x. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  Priedhorsky, Reid, Jilin Chen, Shyong (Tony) K. Lam, Katherine Panciera, Loren Terveen, and John Riedl. "Creating, Destroying, and Restoring Value in Wikipedia". Proc. GROUP 2007; doi:10.1145/1316624.1316663 Reagle, Joseph (2007). Do as I Do: Authorial Leadership in Wikipedia (PDF). WikiSym '07: Proceedings of the 2007 International Symposium on Wikis. Montreal, Canada: ACM. Retrieved December 26, 2008.  Rosenzweig, Roy. Can History be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the Past. (Originally published in The Journal of American History 93.1 (June 2006): 117–46.) Wilkinson, Dennis M.; Bernardo A. Huberman (April 2007). "Assessing the Value of Cooperation in Wikipedia". First Monday. 12 (4). doi:10.5210/fm.v12i4.1763. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Aaron Halfaker; R. Stuart Geiger; Jonathan T. Morgan; John Riedl (2012). "The Rise and Decline of an Open Collaboration Community". American Behavioral Scientist. 57 (5): 664. doi:10.1177/0002764212469365. Retrieved August 30, 2012.  Books Main article: List of books about Wikipedia Ayers, Phoebe; Matthews, Charles; Yates, Ben (September 2008). How Wikipedia Works: And How You Can Be a Part of It. San Francisco: No Starch Press. ISBN 978-1-59327-176-3.  Broughton, John (2008). Wikipedia – The Missing Manual. O'Reilly Media. ISBN 0-596-51516-2.  (See book review by Baker, as listed hereafter.) Broughton, John (2008). Wikipedia Reader's Guide. Sebastopol: Pogue Press. ISBN 0-596-52174-X.  Dalby, Andrew (2009). The World and Wikipedia: How We are Editing Reality. Siduri. ISBN 978-0-9562052-0-9.  Jemielniak, Dariusz (2014). Common Knowledge? An Ethnography of Wikipedia. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press. ISBN 9780804789448.  Keen, Andrew (2007). The Cult of the Amateur. Doubleday/Currency. ISBN 978-0-385-52080-5.  (Substantial criticisms of Wikipedia and other web 2.0 projects.) Listen to: Keen, Andrew (June 16, 2007). "Does the Internet Undermine Culture?". National Public Radio, USA.  The NPR interview with A. Keen, Weekend Edition Saturday, June 16, 2007. Lih, Andrew (2009). The Wikipedia Revolution: How a Bunch of Nobodies Created the World's Greatest Encyclopedia. New York: Hyperion. ISBN 978-1-4013-0371-6.  O'Sullivan, Dan (September 24, 2009). Wikipedia: a new community of practice?. Ashgate Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7546-7433-7.  Sheizaf Rafaeli & Yaron Ariel (2008). "Online motivational factors: Incentives for participation and contribution in Wikipedia." In Barak, A. Psychological aspects of cyberspace: Theory, research, applications. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp. 243–267.  Reagle, Joseph Michael Jr. (2010). Good Faith Collaboration: The Culture of Wikipedia. Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA: the MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-01447-2. Retrieved October 25, 2015.  Wells, Herbert George. (2013). World Brain. New Delhi, India: Isha Books (reprint). ISBN 978-9-333-39061-3. Retrieved June 18, 2016.  Book reviews and other articles Baker, Nicholson. "The Charms of Wikipedia". The New York Review of Books, March 20, 2008. Retrieved December 17, 2008. (Book rev. of The Missing Manual, by John Broughton, as listed previously.) Crovitz, L. Gordon. "Wikipedia's Old-Fashioned Revolution: The online encyclopedia is fast becoming the best." (Originally published in Wall Street Journal online – April 6, 2009.) Postrel, Virginia, "Who Killed Wikipedia? : A hardened corps of volunteer editors is the only force protecting Wikipedia. They might also be killing it", Pacific Standard magazine, November/December 2014 issue. Learning resources Wikiversity list of learning resources. (Includes related courses, Web-based seminars, slides, lecture notes, text books, quizzes, glossaries, etc.) The Great Book of Knowledge, Part 1: A Wiki is a Kind of Bus, Ideas, with Paul Kennedy, CBC Radio One, originally broadcast January 15, 2014. Webpage includes a link to the archived audio program (also found here). The radio documentary discusses Wikipedia's history, development and its place within the broader scope of the trend to democratized knowledge. It also includes interviews with several key Wikipedia staff and contributors, including Kat Walsh and Sue Gardner (audio, 53:58, Flash required). Other media coverage See also: List of films about Wikipedia "See Who's Editing Wikipedia – Diebold, the CIA, a Campaign", WIRED, August 14, 2007. Balke, Jeff (March 2008). "For Music Fans: Wikipedia; MySpace". Houston Chronicle. Broken Record (blog). Retrieved December 17, 2008.  Dee, Jonathan (July 1, 2007). "All the News That's Fit to Print Out". The New York Times Magazine. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Giles, Jim (September 20, 2007). "Wikipedia 2.0 – Now with Added Trust". New Scientist. Retrieved January 14, 2008.  Miliard, Mike (December 2, 2007). "Wikipedia Rules". The Phoenix. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  Poe, Marshall (September 1, 2006). "The Hive". The Atlantic Monthly. Retrieved March 22, 2008.  Rosenwald, Michael S. (October 23, 2009). "Gatekeeper of D.C.'s entry: Road to city's Wikipedia page goes through a DuPont Circle bedroom". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 22, 2009.  Runciman, David (May 28, 2009). "Like Boiling a Frog". London Review of Books. Retrieved June 3, 2009.  Taylor, Chris (May 29, 2005). "It's a Wiki, Wiki World". Time. Retrieved February 22, 2008.  "Technological Quarterly: Brain Scan: The Free-knowledge Fundamentalist". The Economist Web and Print. June 5, 2008. Retrieved June 5, 2008. Jimmy Wales changed the world with Wikipedia, the hugely popular online encyclopedia that anyone can edit. What will he do next?  "Is Wikipedia Cracking Up?" The Independent, February 3, 2009. "Wikipedia probe into paid-for 'sockpuppet' entries", BBC News', October 21, 2013. "The Decline of Wikipedia", MIT Technology Review, October 22, 2013 Edits to Wikipedia pages on Bell, Garner, Diallo traced to 1 Police Plaza (March 2015), Capital Angola's Wikipedia Pirates Are Exposing Problems (March 2016), Motherboard Dark Side of Wikipedia at the Wayback Machine (archived August 4, 2016) Full Measure with Sharyl Attkinson, April 17, 2016. (Includes video.) Wales, Jimmy (December 9, 2016). "How Wikipedia Works". cato.org. Cato Institute. Jimmy Wales, founder of Wikipedia, discusses the site, how it’s treated by governments, and how it’s fueled by its users.  External links Find more aboutWikipediaat Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Travel guide from Wikivoyage Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Discussion from Meta-Wiki Documentation from MediaWiki Official website (Mobile) – multilingual portal (contains links to all language editions) (wikipedia.com still redirects here) Wikipedia at DMOZ Wikitrends: Wikipedia articles most visited today "Wikipedia collected news and commentary". The Guardian.  Wikipedia topic page at The New York Times Video of TED talk by Jimmy Wales on the birth of Wikipedia v t e Wikipedia Overview Purpose Censorship Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Deletionism and inclusionism Gender bias Racial bias MediaWiki Notability Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators Arbitration Committee Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wikipedian in residence Wikimania People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Larry Sanger Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikipedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Internet Watch Foundation Scientology Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz Lsjbot VisualEditor Art+Feminism #1Lib1Ref Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Wikipediocracy Wiki-Watch Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related Wikimedia movement Wikimedia Foundation projects The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Category v t e Wikis Types Personal Medical Semantic Wiki farm Components Software Markup Interwiki links Lists Wikis Software Markups and parsers Comparisons Software Wiki farms See also History of wikis Creole v t e Wikimedia Foundation People Current Aaron Halfaker Dariusz Jemielniak Guy Kawasaki Katherine Maher Jimmy Wales Past Hampton Catlin Danese Cooper Bishakha Datta Florence Devouard Oscar van Dillen Sue Gardner Arnnon Geshuri Mike Godwin James Heilman Erik Möller Lila Tretikov Luis Villa Content projects Wikipedia MediaWiki Wiktionary Wikiquote Wikibooks Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikinews Wikiversity Wikidata Wikivoyage Other List of Wikipedias List of Wikimedia chapters Wikimania The Signpost Litigation Wikimedia v. NSA Wikimedia movement Knowledge Engine v t e List of Wikipedias by article count 5,000,000+ English 2,000,000+ Cebuano Swedish German 1,000,000+ Dutch French Russian Italian Spanish Waray Polish Vietnamese Japanese 500,000+ Portuguese Chinese Ukrainian Catalan Persian Arabic 200,000+ Norwegian (bokmål/riksmål) Serbo-Croatian Finnish Hungarian Indonesian Korean Czech Romanian Serbian Turkish Malay Basque Esperanto Bulgarian Danish Minangkabau Armenian Kazakh Slovak Min Nan Hebrew 100,000+ Lithuanian Croatian Chechen Estonian Slovene Belarusian Galician Norwegian (nynorsk) Greek Uzbek Latin Simple English Urdu Volapük Hindi Azerbaijani Thai Georgian 50,000+ Tamil Welsh Macedonian Malagasy Occitan Latvian Bosnian Newar Tatar Tajik Tagalog Telugu Albanian Kirghiz Piedmontese Breton Belarusian (Taraškievica) Cantonese Haitian 20,000+ Javanese Kannada Icelandic Asturian Marathi Malayalam Bengali Afrikaans Irish Scots Chuvash West Frisian Burmese Swahili Aragonese Yoruba Ido Nepal Bhasa Sicilian Bishnupriya Manipuri Punjabi Alemannic 10,000+ Sundanese Mongolian Egyptian Arabic Samogitian Yiddish Odia Ossetian Sanskrit 1,000+ Uyghur Northern Sami Pashto Dutch Low Saxon Sindhi Jamaican Creole Crimean Tatar Silesian Assamese Ripuarian Konkani Tulu Wolof Classical Chinese 100+ Zulu Xhosa Bambara Venda Cree Authority control WorldCat Identities VIAF: 195846295 LCCN: no2008072801 ISNI: 0000 0004 4914 788X GND: 7545251-0 SUDOC: 11109383X BNF: cb150837752 (data) NKC: kn20090528031 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia&oldid=776980171" Categories: Wikipedia 2001 establishments in the United States American websites Collaborative projects Creative Commons-licensed websites Free internet encyclopedias Internet properties established in 2001 Multilingual websites Open content projects Social information processing Virtual communities Wikimedia projects Wikis Hidden categories: CS1 maint: Unfit url Webarchive template wayback links Pages containing links to subscription-only content CS1 German-language sources (de) Pages using citations with format and no URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2016 Articles with permanently dead external links Pages using web citations with no URL Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles with dead external links from July 2015 Articles with dead external links from March 2017 CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template webcite links Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use American English from November 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from April 2017 Pages using deprecated image syntax Articles containing potentially dated statements from April 2017 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles including recorded pronunciations Articles containing potentially dated statements from February 2014 Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2015 Articles containing potentially dated statements from January 2017 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from March 2017 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Wikipedia articles in need of updating from November 2016 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2008 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from October 2015 Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2010 Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2009 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007 Articles with DMOZ links Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Articles containing video clips Pages with graphs Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikibooks Wikinews Wikiquote Wikiversity Languages Acèh ???????? Afrikaans Akan Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ?????? ??????? Aragonés ????? Armãneashti Arpetan ??????? Asturianu Avañe'? ???? Aymar aru Az?rbaycanca ?????? Bamanankan ????? Bahasa Banjar Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ??????? Bikol Central Bislama ????????? Boarisch ??????? Bosanski Brezhoneg ?????? Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? Dolnoserbski Eesti ???????? Emiliàn e rumagnòl ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ?? G?k?y? ????? ??????? ?????? ?????? ?????? / Gõychi Konknni ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa Hawai?i ??????? ?????? Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue ??????/inuktitut Iñupiak ???? IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kalaallisut ????? Kapampangan ????????-??????? ??????? ????? / ????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî ???????? ????? ???? Ladino ????? ????? ??? ???? ?????? Latga?u Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Ligure Limburgs Lingála Livvinkarjala La .lojban. Luganda Lumbaart Magyar ?????? ?????????? Malagasy ?????? Malti M?ori ????? ????????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-d??ng-ng?? Mirandés ??????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????? N?huatl Dorerin Naoero Nederlands Nedersaksies ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norfuk / Pitkern Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? Pälzisch Pangasinan ?????? Papiamentu ???? Patois ????? ???? ????????? Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski ???????? Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Q?r?mtatarca Reo tahiti Ripoarisch Român? Romani Rumantsch Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sámegiella Gagana Samoa ????????? Sängö Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana Shqip Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? SiSwati Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????????? / ?????????? ?l?nski Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Sranantongo ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Taqbaylit Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ?????? Tetun ??? ???? ?????? ??? Tsetsêhestâhese Tshivenda Türkçe Türkmençe Twi ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? ???? ???????? / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Võro Walon ?? West-Vlams Winaray Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zazaki Zeêuws Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 24 April 2017, at 14:46. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_content |||Free content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For the use of free content on Wikipedia, see Wikipedia:Free content. Free Cultural Works logo Free content, libre content, or free information, is any kind of functional work, work of art, or other creative content that meets the definition of a free cultural work. Contents 1 Definition 2 Legal matters 2.1 Copyright 2.2 Public domain 2.3 Copyleft 3 Usage 3.1 Media 3.2 Software 3.3 Engineering and technology 3.4 Academia 3.5 Legislation 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Definition[edit] A free cultural work (free content) is, according to the Definition of free cultural works, one that has no significant legal restriction on people's freedom to: use the content and benefit from using it, study the content and apply what is learned, make and distribute copies of the content, change and improve the content and distribute these derivative works.[1][2] Free content encompasses all works in the public domain and also those copyrighted works whose licenses honor and uphold the freedoms mentioned above. Because the Berne Convention in most countries by default grants copyright holders monopolistic control over their creations, copyright content must be explicitly declared free, usually by the referencing or inclusion of licensing statements from within the work. Although there are a great many different definitions in regular everyday use, free content is legally very similar, if not like an identical twin, to open content. An analogy is the use of the rival terms free software and open source, which describe ideological differences rather than legal ones.[3][4][5] For instance, the Open Knowledge Foundation's Open Definition describes "open" as synonymous to the definition of free in the "Definition of Free Cultural Works" (as also in the Open Source Definition and Free Software Definition).[6] For such free/open content both movements recommend the same three Creative Commons licenses, the CC BY, CC BY-SA, and CC0.[7][8][9][10] Legal matters[edit] Copyright[edit] copyright Main article: Copyright Copyright is a legal concept, which gives the author or creator of a work legal control over the duplication and public performance of his or her work. In many jurisdictions, this is limited by a time period after which the works then enter the public domain. Copyright laws are a balance between the rights of creators of intellectual and artistic works and the rights of others to build upon those works. During the time period of copyright the author's work may only be copied, modified, or publicly performed with the consent of the author, unless the use is a fair use. Traditional copyright control limits the use of the work of the author to those who either pay royalties to the author for usage of the authors content, or limit their use to fair use. Secondly it limits the use of content whose author cannot be found.[11] Finally it creates a perceived barrier between authors by limiting derivative works, such as mashups and collaborative content[12] Public domain[edit] public domain Main article: Public domain The public domain is a range of creative works whose copyright has expired, or was never established; as well as ideas and facts[nb 1] which are ineligible for copyright. A public domain work is a work whose author has either relinquished to the public, or no longer can claim control over, the distribution and usage of the work. As such any person may manipulate, distribute, or otherwise utilize the work, without legal ramifications. A work in the public domain or released under a permissive licence may be referred to as "copycenter".[13] Copyleft[edit] Main article: Copyleft copyleft Copyleft is a play on the word copyright and describes the practice of using copyright law to remove restrictions on distributing copies and modified versions of a work.[14] The aim of copyleft is to use the legal framework of copyright to enable non-author parties to be able to reuse and, in many licensing schemes, modify content that is created by an author. Unlike works in the public domain, the author still maintains copyright over the material, however the author has granted a non-exclusive license to any person to distribute, and often modify, the work. Copyleft licenses require that any derivative works be distributed under the same terms, and that the original copyright notices be maintained. A symbol commonly associated with copyleft is a reversal of the copyright symbol, facing the other way; the opening of the C points left rather than right. Unlike the copyright symbol, the copyleft symbol does not have a codified meaning.[15] Usage[edit] Projects that provide free content exist in several areas of interest, such as software, academic literature, general literature, music, images, video, and engineering. Technology has reduced the cost of publication and reduced the entry barrier sufficiently to allow for the production of widely disseminated materials by individuals or small groups. Projects to provide free literature and multimedia content have become increasingly prominent owing to the ease of dissemination of materials that is associated with the development of computer technology. Such dissemination may have been too costly prior to these technological developments. Media[edit] Creative Commons Main article: Creative Commons In media, which includes textual, audio, and visual content, free licensing schemes such as some of the licenses made by Creative Commons have allowed for the dissemination of works under a clear set of legal permissions. Not all of the Creative Commons’ licenses are entirely free: their permissions may range from very liberal general redistribution and modification of the work to a more restrictive redistribution-only licensing. Since February 2008, Creative Commons licenses which are entirely free carry a badge indicating that they are "approved for free cultural works".[16] Repositories exist which exclusively feature free material provide content such as photographs, clip art, music,[17] and literature,.[18] While extensive reuse of free content from one website in another website is legal, it is usually not sensible because of the duplicate content problem. Wikipedia is amongst the most well known databases of user uploaded free content on the web. While the vast majority of content on Wikipedia is free content, some copyrighted material is hosted under Fair-use criteria. Software[edit] OSI logo FSF logo Main article: Free and open-source software Free and open source software, which is also often referred to as open source software and free software, is a maturing technology with major companies utilising free software to provide both services and technology to both end users and technical consumers. The ease of dissemination has allowed for increased modularity, which allows for smaller groups to contribute to projects as well as simplifying collaboration. Open source development models have been classified as having a similar peer-recognition and collaborative benefit incentives that are typified by more classical fields such as scientific research, with the social structures that result from this incentive model decreasing production cost.[19] Given sufficient interest in a software component, by using peer-to-peer distribution methods, distribution costs of software may be reduced, removing the burden of infrastructure maintenance from developers. As distribution resources are simultaneously provided by consumers, these software distribution models are scalable, that is the method is feasible regardless of the number of consumers. In some cases, free software vendors may use peer-to-peer technology as a method of dissemination.[20] In general, project hosting and code distribution is not a problem for the most of free projects as a number of providers offer them these services for free. Engineering and technology[edit] Open source hardware logo Free content principles have been translated into fields such as engineering, where designs and engineering knowledge can be readily shared and duplicated, in order to reduce overheads associated with project development. Open design principles can be applied in engineering and technological applications, with projects in mobile telephony, small-scale manufacture,[21] the automotive industry,[22][23] and even agricultural areas.[24] Technologies such as distributed manufacturing can allow computer-aided manufacturing and computer-aided design techniques to be able to develop small-scale production of components for the development of new, or repair of existing, devices. Rapid fabrication technologies underpin these developments, which allow end users of technology to be able to construct devices from pre-existing blueprints, using software and manufacturing hardware to convert information into physical objects. Academia[edit] open access Main article: Open access (publishing) In academic work, the majority of works are not free, although the percentage of works that are open access is growing rapidly. Open access refers to online research outputs that are free of all restrictions on access (e.g. access tolls) and free of many restrictions on use (e.g. certain copyright and license restrictions).[25] Authors may see open access publishing as a method of expanding the audience that is able to access their work to allow for greater impact of the publication, or may support it for ideological reasons.[26][27][28] Open access publishers such as PLOS and Biomed Central provide capacity for review and publishing of free works; though such publications are currently more common in science than humanities. Various funding institutions and governing research bodies have mandated that academics must produce their works to be open-access, in order to qualify for funding, such as the National Institutes of Health, RCUK (effective 2016) and the EU (effective 2020).[29][30][31][32] At an institutional level some universities, such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), have adopted open access publishing by default by introducing their own mandates.[33] Some mandates may permit delayed publication and may charge researchers for open access publishing.[34][35] Open content publication has been seen as a method of reducing costs associated with information retrieval in research, as universities typically pay to subscribe for access to content that is published through traditional means[10][36][37] whilst improving journal quality by discouraging the submission of research articles of reduced quality.[10] Subscriptions for non-free content journals may be expensive for universities to purchase, though the article are written and peer-reviewed by academics themselves at no cost to the publisher. This has led to disputes between publishers and some universities over subscription costs, such as the one which occurred between the University of California and the Nature Publishing Group.[38][39] For teaching purposes, some universities, including MIT, provide freely available course content, such as lecture notes, video resources and tutorials. This content is distributed via Internet resources to the general public. Publication of such resources may be either by a formal institution-wide program,[40] or alternately via informal content provided by individual academics or departments. Legislation[edit] Any country has its own law and legal system, sustained by its legislation, a set of law-documents — documents containing statutory obligation rules, usually law and created by legislatures. In a democratic country, each law-document is published as open media content, is in principle a free content; but in general there are no explicit license attributed for each law-document, so the license must be interpreted, is a implied license. Only few countries have explicit licenses in its law-documents, as the UK's Open Government Licence (a CC-BY compatible license). In the other countries, the implied license comes from its proper rules (general laws and rules about copyright in government works). The automatic protection provided by Berne Convention not apply to law-documents: Article 2.4 excludes the official texts from the automatic protection. It is also possible to "inherit" the license from context. The set of country's law-documents is made available through national repositories. Examples of law-document open repositories: LexML Brazil, Legislation.gov.uk, N-Lex of EU countries. In general a law-document is offered in more than one (open) official version, but the main one is that published by a government gazette. So, law-documents can eventually inherit license expressed by the repository or by the gazette that contains it. See also[edit] Content (media) Definition of Free Cultural Works Free and open source software Free culture movement Free software movement Freedom of information Libre knowledge Open Content Alliance Open publishing Open-source hardware Permissive free software licence Project Gutenberg Notes[edit] ^ The copyright status of uncreative aggregates of basic data may differ by region, for the USA see Feist Publications v. Rural Telephone Service, for Australia, see Telstra v Desktop Marketing Systems References[edit] ^ Erik Möller, e.a. (2008). "Definition of Free Cultural Works". 1.1. freedomdefined.org. Retrieved 2015-04-20.  ^ Stallman, Richard (November 13, 2008). "Free Software and Free Manuals". Free Software Foundation. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Stallman, Richard. "Why Open Source misses the point of Free Software". Free Software Foundation.  ^ Kelty, Christpher M. (2008). "The Cultural Significance of free Software - Two Bits" (PDF). Duke University press - durham and london. p. 99. Prior to 1998, Free Software referred either to the Free Software Foundation (and the watchful, micromanaging eye of Stallman) or to one of thousands of different commercial, avocational, or university-research projects, processes, licenses, and ideologies that had a variety of names: sourceware, freeware, shareware, open software, public domain software, and so on. The term Open Source, by contrast, sought to encompass them all in one movement.  ^ "Goodbye, "free software"; hello, "open source"". Catb.org. Retrieved 2012-10-25.  ^ Open Definition 2.1 on opendefinition.org "This essential meaning matches that of "open" with respect to software as in the Open Source Definition and is synonymous with "free" or "libre" as in the Free Software Definition and Definition of Free Cultural Works." ^ licenses on opendefinition.com ^ Creative Commons 4.0 BY and BY-SA licenses approved conformant with the Open Definition by Timothy Vollmer on creativecommons.org (December 27th, 2013) ^ Open Definition 2.0 released by Timothy Vollmer on creativecommons.org (October 7th, 2014) ^ a b c "Costs and business models in scientific research publishing: A report commissioned by the Wellcome Trust" (PDF). Retrieved May 23, 2009.  ^ "The Importance of Orphan Works Legislation".  ^ Ben Depoorter; Francesco Parisi (2002). "Fair use and copyright protection: a price theory explanation". International Review of Law and Economics. 21 (4): 453. doi:10.1016/S0144-8188#01)00071-0.  ^ Raymond, Eric S. "Copycenter". The Jargon File. Retrieved August 9, 2008.  ^ Dusollier, S (2003). "Open source and copyleft. Authorship reconsidered?". Columbia journal of Law and the Arts. 26 (296).  ^ Hall, G. Brent (2008). Open Source Approaches in Spatial Data Handling. Springer. p. 29. ISBN 3-540-74830-X. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Linksvayer, Mike (February 20, 2008). "Approved for Free Cultural Works". Creative Commons. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "iRate Radio". SourceForge.net. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "Gutenberg:No Cost or Freedom?". Project Gutenberg. April 23, 2007. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Mustonen, Mikko. "Copyleft – the economics of Linux and other open source software" (PDF). Discussion Paper No. 493. Department of Economics, University of Helsinki. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Pawlak, Michel; Bryce, Ciarán; Laurière, Stéphane (May 29, 2008). "The Practice of Free and Open Source Software Processes" (PDF). Rapport de recherche. inria-00274193, version 2. Institut national de recherche en informatique et en automatique (INRIA). N° 6519 (April 2008). ISSN 0249-6399. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Hendry, Andrew (March 4, 2008). "RepRap: An open-source 3D printer for the masses". Computerworld Australia. The Industry Standard. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Honsig, Markus (January 25, 2006). "The most open of all cars". Technology Review (in German). Heinz Heise. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "Australian drive for green commuter cars". The Sydney Morning Herald. Sydney. 14 June 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2015.  ^ Stewart, Jr., C. Neal (December 2005). "Open-source Agriculture" (PDF). ISB News Report. Information Systems for Biotechnology (ISB). Retrieved March 22, 2009.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Suber, Peter. "Open Access Overview". Earlham.edu. Retrieved on 2011-12-03. ^ Alma Swan; Sheridan Brown (May 2005). "Open access self-archiving: An author study" (PDF). Key Perspectives Limited.  ^ Andrew, Theo (October 30, 2003). "Trends in Self-Posting of Research Material Online by Academic Staff". Ariadne. UKOLN (37). ISSN 1361-3200. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Key Perspectives. "JISC/OSI Journal Authors Survey Report" (PDF). Joint Information Systems Committee (JISC). Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ Haslam, Maryanne. "NHMRC Partnership Projects – Funding Policy" (PDF). National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 17, 2009. Retrieved March 22, 2009.  ^ "Policy on Enhancing Public Access to Archived Publications Resulting from NIH-Funded Research". Retrieved July 12, 2009.  ^ "Open access - RCUK Policy and revised guidance".  ^ "Outcome of Proceedings, 9526/16 RECH 208 TELECOM 100, The transition towards an Open Science System".  ^ "MIT faculty open access to their scholarly articles". MIT news. 20 March 2009.  ^ "Policy of the Society for General Microbiology towards author self-archiving on PubMed Central and institutional and other repositories". Retrieved April 10, 2009.  ^ "OnlineOpen". Retrieved April 10, 2009.  ^ Mayor, Susan (April 19, 2003). "Libraries face higher costs for academic journals". BMJ: British Medical Journal. BMJ Group. 326 (7394): 840. PMC 1125769.  |access-date= requires |url= (help) ^ "AMS Journal price survey". Retrieved May 23, 2009.  ^ "Response from the University of California to the Public statement from Nature Publishing Group regarding subscription renewals at the California Digital Library" (PDF). June 10, 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 26, 2010. Retrieved September 13, 2015.  ^ Hawkes, Nigel (November 10, 2003). "Boycott 'greedy' journal publishers, say scientists". The Times. London. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Retrieved September 13, 2015.  ^ "About OpenCourseWare". Retrieved April 10, 2009.  Further reading[edit] D. Atkins; J. S. Brown; A. L. Hammond (February 2007). A Review of the Open Educational Resources (OER) Movement: Achievements, Challenges, and New Opportunities. (PDF). Report to The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation.  OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development: Giving Knowledge for free – The Emergence of Open Educational Resources. 2007, ISBN 92-64-03174-X. External links[edit] Definition of Free Cultural Works – A definition of "free content" or "free cultural works" similar to the free software definition "Episodes of collective invention" (PDF) (Peter B. Meyer; August 4, 2003) – article on several U.S.-oriented historical examples of free content in technology Open Definition – project by the Open Knowledge Foundation which provides a definition of "open" suitable for content and data What is free content? on WikiEducator v t e Intellectual property activism Issues Copyright infringement Digital rights management Gripe site Intellectual property Legal aspects of file sharing Mashup digital videos music Music piracy Orphan works Patents biological software software patent debate trolling Public domain Concepts All rights reversed Alternative compensation system Anti-copyright notice Business models for open source software Copyleft Commercial use of copyleft works Commons-based peer production Free content Free software license Infoanarchism Libertarian positions Open content Open design Open Music Model Open patent Open-source hardware Open source software Prize system contests Share-alike Video on demand Movements Access to Knowledge movement Anti-copyright Cultural environmentalism Free culture movement Free software movement Organizations Copyright Alliance Creative Commons Electronic Frontier Foundation Free Software Foundation Open Rights Group Organization for Transformative Works The Pirate Bay Piratbyrån Pirate Party Sci-Hub Students for Free Culture People Alexandra Elbakyan Rickard Falkvinge Lawrence Lessig Richard Stallman Peter Sunde Peter Suber Aaron Swartz Documentaries Steal This Film (2006, 2007) Good Copy Bad Copy (2007) RiP!: A Remix Manifesto (2008) TPB AFK: The Pirate Bay Away From Keyboard (2013) The Internet's Own Boy (2014) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Free_content&oldid=775063470" Categories: Free content Digital art Free software Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Pages using ISBN magic links Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages ??????? ???? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Català ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Gaeilge Galego ??? ??????? Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??? Latviešu Magyar ?????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ??? Napulitano ??????? Polski Português ??????? Scots Shqip Simple English Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ??? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 12 April 2017, at 12:27. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Encyclopedia |||Encyclopedia From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search This article is about the type of reference work. For other uses, see Encyclopedia (disambiguation). This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in German. (December 2015) Click [show] for important translation instructions.  View a machine-translated version of the German article. Google's machine translation is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. After translating, {{Translated|de|Enzyklopädie}} must be added to the talk page to ensure copyright compliance. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. Brockhaus Enzyklopädie An encyclopedia or encyclopaedia (also spelled encyclopædia, see spelling differences)[1] is a type of reference work or compendium holding a comprehensive summary of information from either all branches of knowledge or a particular branch of knowledge.[2] Encyclopedias are divided into articles or entries, which are usually accessed alphabetically by article name.[3] Encyclopedia entries are longer and more detailed than those in most dictionaries.[3] Generally speaking, unlike dictionary entries which focus on linguistic information about words, encyclopedia articles focus on factual information concerning the subject for which the article is named.[4][5][6][7] Encyclopedias have existed for around 2,000 years; the oldest still in existence, Naturalis Historia, was written starting in ca. AD 77 by Pliny the Elder and was not fully revised at the time of his death in AD 79. The modern encyclopedia evolved out of dictionaries around the 17th century. Historically, some encyclopedias were contained in one volume, whereas others, such as the Encyclopædia Britannica, the Enciclopedia Italiana (62 volumes, 56,000 pages) or the world's largest, Enciclopedia universal ilustrada europeo-americana (118 volumes, 105,000 pages), became huge multi-volume works. Some modern encyclopedias, such as Wikipedia, are often electronic and freely available. Contents 1 Etymology 2 Characteristics 3 History 3.1 Ancient times 3.2 Middle Ages 3.3 Renaissance 3.4 18th–19th centuries 3.5 20th century 3.6 21st century 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Etymology See also: American and British English spelling differences § Simplification of ae and oe Title page of "Lucubrationes..." 1541 edition, the first book to use the word encyclopedia in the title The word encyclopedia comes from the Koine Greek ????????? ???????,[8] transliterated enkyklios paideia, meaning "general education" from enkyklios (?????????), meaning "circular, recurrent, required regularly, general"[9] and paideia (???????), meaning "education, rearing of a child";[10] it was reduced to a single word due to an error[11] by copyists of Latin manuscripts. Together, the phrase literally translates as "complete instruction" or "complete knowledge". Indeed, the purpose of an encyclopedia is to collect knowledge disseminated around the globe; to set forth its general system to the men with whom we live, and transmit it to those who will come after us, so that the work of preceding centuries will not become useless to the centuries to come; and so that our offspring, becoming better instructed, will at the same time become more virtuous and happy, and that we should not die without having rendered a service to the human race in the future years to come. —?Diderot[12] Copyists of Latin manuscripts took this phrase to be a single Greek word, enkyklopaidia, with the same meaning, and this spurious Greek word became the New Latin word "encyclopaedia", which in turn came into English. Though the notion of a compendium of knowledge dates back thousands of years, the term was first used in the title of a book in 1517 by Johannes Aventinus: Encyclopedia orbisque doctrinarum, hoc est omnium artium, scientiarum, ipsius philosophiae index ac divisio, and in 1538 by Joachimus Fortius Ringelbergius, Lucubrationes vel potius absolutissima kyklopaideia (Basel, 1538). Title page of Skalich's Encyclopaedia, seu orbis disciplinarum, tam sacrarum quam prophanarum, epistemon from 1559, first to use the word encyclopaedia as a noun in the title The word encyclopaedia was first used as a noun in the title of his book by the Croatian encyclopedist Pavao Skali? in his Encyclopaedia seu orbis disciplinarum tam sacrarum quam prophanarum epistemon (Encyclopaedia, or Knowledge of the World of Disciplines, Basel, 1559). One of the oldest vernacular uses was by François Rabelais in his Pantagruel in 1532.[13][14] Several encyclopedias have names that include the suffix -p(a)edia, e.g., Banglapedia (on matters relevant for Bengal). In British usage, the spellings encyclopedia and encyclopaedia are both current.[15] In American usage, only the former is commonly used.[16] The spelling encyclopædia—with the æ ligature—was frequently used in the 19th century and is increasingly rare, although it is retained in product titles such as Encyclopædia Britannica and others. The Oxford English Dictionary (1989) records encyclopædia and encyclopaedia as equal alternatives (in that order), and notes the æ would be obsolete except that it is preserved in works that have Latin titles. Webster's Third New International Dictionary (1997–2002) features encyclopedia as the main headword and encyclopaedia as a minor variant. In addition, cyclopedia and cyclopaedia are now rarely used shortened forms of the word originating in the 17th century. Characteristics The modern encyclopedia was developed from the dictionary in the 18th century. Historically, both encyclopedias and dictionaries have been researched and written by well-educated, well-informed content experts, but they are significantly different in structure. A dictionary is a linguistic work which primarily focuses on alphabetical listing of words and their definitions. Synonymous words and those related by the subject matter are to be found scattered around the dictionary, giving no obvious place for in-depth treatment. Thus, a dictionary typically provides limited information, analysis or background for the word defined. While it may offer a definition, it may leave the reader lacking in understanding the meaning, significance or limitations of a term, and how the term relates to a broader field of knowledge. An encyclopedia is, allegedly, not written in order to convince, although one of its goals is indeed to convince its reader about its own veracity. In the terms of Aristotle's Modes of persuasion, a dictionary should persuade the reader through logos (conveying only appropriate emotions); it will be expected to have a lack of pathos (it should not stir up irrelevant emotions), and to have little ethos except that of the dictionary itself. To address those needs, an encyclopedia article is typically not limited to simple definitions, and is not limited to defining an individual word, but provides a more extensive meaning for a subject or discipline. In addition to defining and listing synonymous terms for the topic, the article is able to treat the topic's more extensive meaning in more depth and convey the most relevant accumulated knowledge on that subject. An encyclopedia article also often includes many maps and illustrations, as well as bibliography and statistics. Four major elements define an encyclopedia: its subject matter, its scope, its method of organization, and its method of production: Encyclopedias can be general, containing articles on topics in every field (the English-language Encyclopædia Britannica and German Brockhaus are well-known examples). General encyclopedias often contain guides on how to do a variety of things, as well as embedded dictionaries and gazetteers.[citation needed] There are also encyclopedias that cover a wide variety of topics but from a particular cultural, ethnic, or national perspective, such as the Great Soviet Encyclopedia or Encyclopaedia Judaica. Works of encyclopedic scope aim to convey the important accumulated knowledge for their subject domain, such as an encyclopedia of medicine, philosophy, or law. Works vary in the breadth of material and the depth of discussion, depending on the target audience. (For example, the Medical encyclopedia produced by A.D.A.M., Inc. for the U.S. National Institutes of Health.) Some systematic method of organization is essential to making an encyclopedia usable as a work of reference. There have historically been two main methods of organizing printed encyclopedias: the alphabetical method (consisting of a number of separate articles, organized in alphabetical order), or organization by hierarchical categories. The former method is today the most common by far, especially for general works. The fluidity of electronic media, however, allows new possibilities for multiple methods of organization of the same content. Further, electronic media offer previously unimaginable capabilities for search, indexing and cross reference. The epigraph from Horace on the title page of the 18th century Encyclopédie suggests the importance of the structure of an encyclopedia: "What grace may be added to commonplace matters by the power of order and connection." As modern multimedia and the information age have evolved, they have had an ever-increasing effect on the collection, verification, summation, and presentation of information of all kinds. Projects such as Everything2, Encarta, h2g2, and Wikipedia are examples of new forms of the encyclopedia as information retrieval becomes simpler. The method of production for an encyclopedia historically has been supported in both for-profit and non-profit contexts. The Great Soviet Encyclopedia mentioned above was entirely state sponsored, while the Britannica was supported as a for-profit institution. By comparison, Wikipedia is supported by volunteers contributing in a non-profit environment under the organization of the Wikimedia Foundation. Some works entitled "dictionaries" are actually similar to encyclopedias, especially those concerned with a particular field (such as the Dictionary of the Middle Ages, the Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships, and Black's Law Dictionary). The Macquarie Dictionary, Australia's national dictionary, became an encyclopedic dictionary after its first edition in recognition of the use of proper nouns in common communication, and the words derived from such proper nouns. There are some broad differences between encyclopedias and dictionaries. Most noticeably, encyclopedia articles are longer, fuller and more thorough than entries in most general-purpose dictionaries.[3][17] There are differences in content as well. Generally speaking, dictionaries provide linguistic information about words themselves, while encyclopedias focus more on the thing for which those words stand.[4][5][6][7] Thus, while dictionary entries are inextricably fixed to the word described, encyclopedia articles can be given a different entry name. As such, dictionary entries are not fully translatable into other languages, but encyclopedia articles can be.[4] In practice, however, the distinction is not concrete, as there is no clear-cut difference between factual, "encyclopedic" information and linguistic information such as appears in dictionaries.[6][17][18] Thus encyclopedias may contain material that is also found in dictionaries, and vice versa.[18] In particular, dictionary entries often contain factual information about the thing named by the word.[17][18] History Main article: History of encyclopedias Encyclopedias have progressed from the beginning of history in written form, through medieval and modern times in print, and most recently, displayed on computer and distributed via computer networks. Ancient times Naturalis Historiæ, 1669 edition, title page One of the earliest encyclopedic works to have survived to modern times is the Naturalis Historia of Pliny the Elder, a Roman statesman living in the 1st century AD. He compiled a work of 37 chapters covering natural history, architecture, medicine, geography, geology, and all aspects of the world around him. He stated in the preface that he had compiled 20,000 facts from 2000 works by over 200 authors, and added many others from his own experience. The work was published around AD 77-79, although he probably never finished proofing the work before his death in the eruption of Vesuvius in AD 79.[19] Middle Ages Isidore of Seville, one of the greatest scholars of the early Middle Ages, is widely recognized for writing the first encyclopedia of the Middle Ages, the Etymologiae (The Etymologies) or Origines (around 630), in which he compiled a sizable portion of the learning available at his time, both ancient and contemporary. The work has 448 chapters in 20 volumes, and is valuable because of the quotes and fragments of texts by other authors that would have been lost had he not collected them. The most popular encyclopedia of the Carolingian Age was the De universo or De rerum naturis by Rabanus Maurus, written about 830; it was based on Etymologiae.[citation needed] The encyclopedia of Suda, a massive 10th-century Byzantine encyclopedia, had 30 000 entries, many drawing from ancient sources that have since been lost, and often derived from medieval Christian compilers. The text was arranged alphabetically with some slight deviations from common vowel order and place in the Greek alphabet. The early Muslim compilations of knowledge in the Middle Ages included many comprehensive works. Around year 960, the Brethren of Purity of Basra[20] were engaged in their Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity. Notable works include Abu Bakr al-Razi's encyclopedia of science, the Mutazilite Al-Kindi's prolific output of 270 books, and Ibn Sina's medical encyclopedia, which was a standard reference work for centuries. Also notable are works of universal history (or sociology) from Asharites, al-Tabri, al-Masudi, Tabari's History of the Prophets and Kings, Ibn Rustah, al-Athir, and Ibn Khaldun, whose Muqadimmah contains cautions regarding trust in written records that remain wholly applicable today. The enormous encyclopedic work in China of the Four Great Books of Song, compiled by the 11th century AD during the early Song dynasty (960–1279), was a massive literary undertaking for the time. The last encyclopedia of the four, the Prime Tortoise of the Record Bureau, amounted to 9.4 million Chinese characters in 1000 written volumes. In the late Middle Ages, several authors had the ambition of compiling the sum of human knowledge in a certain field or overall, for example Bartholomew of England, Vincent of Beauvais, Radulfus Ardens, Sydrac, Brunetto Latini, Giovanni da Sangiminiano, Pierre Bersuire. Some were women, like Hildegard of Bingen and Herrad of Landsberg. The most successful of those publications were the Speculum maius (Great Mirror) of Vincent of Beauvais and the De proprietatibus rerum (On the Properties of Things) by Bartholomew of England. The latter was translated (or adapted) into French, Provençal, Italian, English, Flemish, Anglo-Norman, Spanish, and German during the Middle Ages. Both were written in the middle of the 13th century. No medieval encyclopedia bore the title Encyclopaedia – they were often called On nature (De natura, De naturis rerum), Mirror (Speculum maius, Speculum universale), Treasure (Trésor).[21] Renaissance Anatomy in Margarita Philosophica, 1565 These works were all hand copied and thus rarely available, beyond wealthy patrons or monastic men of learning: they were expensive, and usually written for those extending knowledge rather than those using it.[22] During the Renaissance, the creation of printing allowed a wider diffusion of encyclopedias and every scholar could have his or her own copy. The De expetendis et fugiendis rebus by Giorgio Valla was posthumously printed in 1501 by Aldo Manuzio in Venice. This work followed the traditional scheme of liberal arts. However, Valla added the translation of ancient Greek works on mathematics (firstly by Archimedes), newly discovered and translated. The Margarita Philosophica by Gregor Reisch, printed in 1503, was a complete encyclopedia explaining the seven liberal arts. The term encyclopaedia was coined by 16th century humanists who misread copies of their texts of Pliny and Quintilian, and combined the two Greek words "enkyklios paideia" into one word, ??????????????.[23] The phrase enkyklios paideia (????????? ???????) was used by Plutarch and the Latin word Encyclopedia came from him. The first work titled in this way was the Encyclopedia orbisque doctrinarum, hoc est omnium artium, scientiarum, ipsius philosophiae index ac divisio written by Johannes Aventinus in 1517.[citation needed] The English physician and philosopher, Sir Thomas Browne used the word 'encyclopaedia' in 1646 in the preface to the reader to define his Pseudodoxia Epidemica, a major work of the 17th-century scientific revolution. Browne structured his encyclopaedia upon the time-honoured schemata of the Renaissance, the so-called 'scale of creation' which ascends through the mineral, vegetable, animal, human, planetary, and cosmological worlds. Pseudodoxia Epidemica was a European best-seller, translated into French, Dutch, and German as well as Latin it went through no fewer than five editions, each revised and augmented, the last edition appearing in 1672. Factors that changed the size of encyclopedias were financial, commercial, legal, and intellectual. During the Renaissance, middle classes were having more time to read and encyclopedias helped them to learn more. Publishers were wanting to increase their output so some countries like Germany start selling books that were missing alphabetical sections to publish faster. Also, publishers could not afford all the resources by themselves so they multiple publishers would come together with their resources to create better encyclopedias. Soon it was difficult financially to continue to produce the amount they wanted to produce so then subscriptions and serial publications were made. This was risky for publishers because they had to find people that would pay all upfront or make payments. When this did work out capital would rise and there would be a steady income for encyclopedias. Later rivalry grew causing copyright to occur due to weak underdeveloped laws. Some publishers would copy another publisher’s work to produce an encyclopedia faster and cheaper so consumers did not have to pay a lot and they would sell more. Encyclopedias made it to where middle class citizens could basically have a small library in their own house. Europeans were becoming more curious about their society around them causing them to revolt against their government.[24] 18th–19th centuries Encyclopédie, 1773 The beginnings of the modern idea of the general-purpose, widely distributed printed encyclopedia precede the 18th century encyclopedists. However, Chambers' Cyclopaedia, or Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences (1728), and the Encyclopédie of Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert (1751 onwards), as well as Encyclopædia Britannica and the Conversations-Lexikon, were the first to realize the form we would recognize today, with a comprehensive scope of topics, discussed in depth and organized in an accessible, systematic method. Chambers, in 1728, followed the earlier lead of John Harris's Lexicon Technicum of 1704 and later editions (see also below); this work was by its title and content "A Universal English Dictionary of Arts and Sciences: Explaining not only the Terms of Art, but the Arts Themselves". During the 19th and early 20th century, many smaller or less developed languages[which?] saw their first encyclopedias, using French, German, and English role models. While encyclopedias in larger languages, having large markets that could support a large editorial staff, churned out new 20-volume works in a few years and new editions with brief intervals, such publication plans often spanned a decade or more in smaller languages.[citation needed] 20th century 1913 advertisement for Encyclopædia Britannica, the oldest and one of the largest contemporary English encyclopedias Popular and affordable encyclopedias such as Harmsworth's Universal Encyclopaedia and the Children's Encyclopaedia appeared in the early 1920s. In the United States, the 1950s and 1960s saw the introduction of several large popular encyclopedias, often sold on installment plans. The best known of these were World Book and Funk and Wagnalls. The second half of the 20th century also saw the proliferation of specialized encyclopedias that compiled topics in specific fields. This trend has continued. Encyclopedias of at least one volume in size now exist for most if not all academic disciplines, including such narrow topics such as bioethics. By the late 20th century, encyclopedias were being published on CD-ROMs for use with personal computers. Microsoft's Encarta, launched in 1993, was a landmark example as it had no printed equivalent. Articles were supplemented with both video and audio files as well as numerous high-quality images. After sixteen years, Microsoft discontinued the Encarta line of products in 2009.[25] 21st century In 2001, Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger launched Wikipedia, a collaboratively edited, multilingual, open-source, free Internet encyclopedia supported by the non-profit Wikimedia Foundation. As of 23 April 2017, there are 5,391,001 articles in the English Wikipedia. There are 287 different editions of Wikipedia. As of February 2014, it had 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors each month.[26] Wikipedia has more than 25 million accounts, out of which there were over 118,000 active editors globally, as of August 2015. Wikipedia's accuracy was found by a Nature study to be close to that of Encyclopædia Britannica,[27] with Wikipedia being much larger. However, critics argue Wikipedia exhibits systemic bias,[28][29] and its group dynamics hinder its goals.[clarification needed] Many academics, historians, teachers, and journalists reject Wikipedia as a reliable source of information, primarily for being a mixture of truths, half truths, and some falsehoods, and that as a resource about many controversial topics, is notoriously subject to manipulation and spin.[citation needed] While Wikipedia is by far the largest web-based encyclopedia, it is not the only one in existence. There are several much smaller, usually more specialized, encyclopedias on various themes, sometimes dedicated to a specific geographic region or time period.[30] See also Bibliography of encyclopedias Biographical dictionary Encyclopedic knowledge Encyclopedism Fictitious entry History of science and technology Lexicography Library science Lists of encyclopedias Thesaurus Speculum literature Portals Access related topics Literature portal Library and information science portal Education portal Notes ^ "encyclopaedia" (online). Oxford English Dictionary (OED.com), Oxford University Press. Retrieved February 18, 2012.  ^ "Encyclopedia.". Archived from the original on August 3, 2007.  Glossary of Library Terms. Riverside City College, Digital Library/Learning Resource Center. Retrieved on: November 17, 2007. ^ a b c Hartmann, R. R. K.; James, Gregory; James, Gregory (1998). Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge. p. 48. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010.  ^ a b c Béjoint, Henri (2000). Modern Lexicography, pp. 30–31. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-829951-6 ^ a b "Encyclopaedia". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved July 27, 2010. An English lexicographer, H.W. Fowler, wrote in the preface to the first edition (1911) of The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Current English language that a dictionary is concerned with the uses of words and phrases and with giving information about the things for which they stand only so far as current use of the words depends upon knowledge of those things. The emphasis in an encyclopedia is much more on the nature of the things for which the words and phrases stand.  ^ a b c Hartmann, R. R. K.; Gregory, James (1998). Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge. p. 49. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010. In contrast with linguistic information, encyclopedia material is more concerned with the description of objective realities than the words or phrases that refer to them. In practice, however, there is no hard and fast boundary between factual and lexical knowledge.  ^ a b Cowie, Anthony Paul (2009). The Oxford History of English Lexicography, Volume I. Oxford University Press. p. 22. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved August 17, 2010. An 'encyclopedia' (encyclopaedia) usually gives more information than a dictionary; it explains not only the words but also the things and concepts referred to by the words.  ^ ????????? ???????, Quintilian, Institutio Oratoria, 1.10.1, at Perseus Project ^ ?????????, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon, at Perseus Project ^ ???????, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon, at Perseus Project ^ According to some accounts, such as the American Heritage Dictionary, copyists of Latin manuscripts took this phrase to be a single Greek word, ?????????????? enkyklopaidia. ^ Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert Encyclopédie. University of Michigan Library:Scholarly Publishing Office and DLXS. Retrieved on: November 17, 2007 ^ Roest, Bert (1997). "Compilation as Theme and Praxis in Franciscan Universal Chronicles". In Peter Binkley. Pre-Modern Encyclopaedic Texts: Proceedings of the Second Comers Congress, Groningen, 1 – July 4, 1996. BRILL. p. 213. ISBN 90-04-10830-0.  ^ Carey, Sorcha (2003). "Two Strategies of Encyclopaedism". Pliny's Catalogue of Culture: Art and Empire in the Natural History. Oxford University Press. p. 17. ISBN 0-19-925913-5.  ^ "encyclopaedia", Chambers Reference Online; "encyclopaedia"[dead link], AskOxford. ^ "encyclopaedia" Archived February 17, 2009, at the Wayback Machine., Bartleby.com; "Encyclopaedia", Merriam Webster."Archived copy". Archived from the original on February 17, 2009. Retrieved 2006-12-12.  CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) ^ a b c Hartmann, R. R. K.; James, Gregory; James, Gregory (1998). "Encyclopedic definition". Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge: 48–49. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010. Usually these two aspects overlap – encyclopedic information being difficult to distinguish from linguistic information – and dictionaries attempt to capture both in the explanation of a meaning...  ^ a b c Béjoint, Henri (2000). Modern Lexicography. Oxford University Press. p. 31. ISBN 0-19-829951-6. The two types, as we have seen, are not easily differentiated; encyclopedias contain information that is also to be found in dictionaries, and vice versa.  ^ Naturalis Historia ^ P.D. Wightman (1953), The Growth of Scientific Ideas ^ Monique Paulmier-Foucart, "Medieval Encyclopaedias", in André Vauchez (ed.), Encyclopedia of the Middle Ages, James Clarke & Co, 2002. ^ See "Encyclopedia" in Dictionary of the Middle Ages. ^ ??????????????, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon, at Perseus Project: "f. l. [= falsa lectio, Latin for "false reading"] for ????????? ???????" ^ Loveland, J. (2012). "Why Encyclopedias Got Bigger … and Smaller". Information & Culture. 47 (2): 233–254. doi:10.1353/lac.2012.0012.  ^ Important Notice: MSN Encarta to be Discontinued. MSN Encarta. Archived from the original on October 31, 2009.  ^ Cohen, Noam (February 9, 2014). "Wikipedia vs. the Small Screen". New York Times.  ^ Giles, Jim (December 2005). "Internet encyclopedias go head to head". Nature. 438 (7070): 900–901. Bibcode:2005Natur.438..900G. doi:10.1038/438900a. PMID 16355180. (subscription required) Note: The study was cited in several news articles; e.g.: "Wikipedia survives research test". BBC News. December 15, 2005.  ^ "Gender Bias in Wikipedia and Britannica". Retrieved June 2, 2015.  ^ "Analyzing and visualizing the semantic coverage of Wikipedia and its authors". Complexity. 12: 30–40. doi:10.1002/cplx.20164. Retrieved June 2, 2015.  ^ Sideris A., "The Encyclopedic Concept in the Web Era", in Ioannides M., Arnold D., Niccolucci F. and K. Mania (eds.), The e-volution of Information Communication Technology in Cultural Heritage. Where Hi-Tech Touches the Past: Risks and Challenges for the 21st Century. VAST 2006, Epoch, Budapest 2006, pp. 192-197. ISBN 963-8046-74-0. References EtymologyOnline "Encyclopaedia". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved July 27, 2010.  Béjoint, Henri (2000). Modern Lexicography. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-829951-6.  C. Codoner, S. Louis, M. Paulmier-Foucart, D. Hüe, M. Salvat, A. Llinares, L'Encyclopédisme. Actes du Colloque de Caen, A. Becq (dir.), Paris, 1991. Bergenholtz, H.; Nielsen, S.; Tarp, S., eds. (2009). Lexicography at a Crossroads: Dictionaries and Encyclopedias Today, Lexicographical Tools Tomorrow. Peter Lang. ISBN 978-3-03911-799-4.  Blom, Phillip (2004). Enlightening the World: Encyclopédie, the Book that Changed the Course of History. New York; Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-4039-6895-1. OCLC 57669780.  Collison, Robert Lewis (1966). Encyclopaedias: Their History Throughout the Ages (2nd ed.). New York, London: Hafner. OCLC 220101699.  Cowie, Anthony Paul (2009). The Oxford History of English Lexicography, Volume I. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved August 17, 2010.  Darnton, Robert (1979). The business of enlightenment : a publishing history of the Encyclopédie, 1775–1800. Cambridge: Belknap Press. ISBN 0-674-08785-2.  Hartmann, R. R. K.; James, Gregory; James, Gregory (1998). Dictionary of Lexicography. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-14143-5. Retrieved July 27, 2010.  Kafker, Frank A., ed. (1981). Notable encyclopedias of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries: nine predecessors of the Encyclopédie. Oxford: Voltaire Foundation. ISBN 978-0-7294-0256-9. OCLC 10645788.  Kafker, Frank A., ed. (1994). Notable encyclopedias of the late eighteenth century: eleven successors of the Encyclopédie. Oxford: Voltaire Foundation. ISBN 978-0-7294-0467-9. OCLC 30787125.  Needham, Joseph (1986). "Part 7, Military Technology; the Gunpowder Epic". Science and Civilization in China. 5 – Chemistry and Chemical Technology. Taipei: Caves Books Ltd. ISBN 978-0-521-30358-3. OCLC 59245877.  Rosenzweig, Roy (June 2006). "Can History Be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the Past". Journal of American History. 93 (1): 117–46. doi:10.2307/4486062. ISSN 1945-2314. Archived from the original on April 25, 2010.  Sideris, Athanasios (2006). "The Encyclopedic Concept in the Web Era", in Ioannides M., Arnold D., Niccolucci F. and K. Mania (eds.), The e-volution of Information Communication Technology in Cultural Heritage. Where Hi-Tech Touches the Past: Risks and Challenges for the 21st Century. VAST 2006, Epoch, Budapest, pp. 192–197. ISBN 963-8046-74-0. Walsh, S. Padraig (1968). Anglo-American general encyclopedias: a historical bibliography, 1703–1967. New York: Bowker. p. 270. OCLC 577541.  Yeo, Richard R. (2001). Encyclopaedic visions : scientific dictionaries and enlightenment culture. Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-65191-2. OCLC 45828872.  External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Encyclopedias. Look up encyclopedia, encyclopaedia, or encyclopedic in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikisource has original works on the topic: Encyclopedias Encyclopaedia and Hypertext Internet Accuracy Project – Biographical errors in encyclopedias and almanacs Encyclopedia – Diderot's article on the Encyclopedia from the original Encyclopédie. De expetendis et fugiendis rebus – First Renaissance encyclopedia Errors and inconsistencies in several printed reference books and encyclopedias Archived July 18, 2001, at the Wayback Machine. Digital encyclopedias put the world at your fingertips – CNET article Encyclopedias online University of Wisconsin – Stout listing by category Chambers' Cyclopaedia, 1728, with the 1753 supplement Encyclopædia Americana, 1851, Francis Lieber ed. (Boston: Mussey & Co.) at the University of Michigan Making of America site Encyclopædia Britannica, articles and illustrations from 9th ed., 1875–89, and 10th ed., 1902–03. Texts on Wikisource: "Cyclopædia". Collier's New Encyclopedia. 1921.  "Encyclopædia". Encyclopedia Americana. 1920.  "Encyclopædia". The New Student's Reference Work. 1914.  "Encyclopaedia". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.  "Encyclopædia". The Nuttall Encyclopædia. 1907.  "Encyclopædia". New International Encyclopedia. 1905.  "Cyclopædia". The American Cyclopædia. 1879.  Authority control GND: 4014986-9 NDL: 00563841 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Encyclopedia&oldid=774134996" Categories: Encyclopedias Works about history Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2016 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown Pages containing links to subscription-only content Pages using ISBN magic links Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use mdy dates from February 2016 Articles to be expanded from December 2015 All articles to be expanded Featured articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Articles containing Ancient Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Collier's Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW with an wstitle parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Nuttall Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans Akan Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti Asturianu ???? Az?rbaycanca Bamanankan ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski Eesti ???????? Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ??? Hawai?i ??????? ?????? Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ????? / ????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Ladino ????? ??? Latga?u Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Limburgs Lumbaart Magyar ?????????? Malagasy ?????? Malti ????? ????????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-d??ng-ng?? Mirandés ?????? ?????????? N?huatl Nederlands Nedersaksies ?????? ??? Napulitano ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan ???? ????? ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ?????? Papiamentu ???? ????????? Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski ???????? Português Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? ????????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????????? / ?????????? ?l?nski ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ?????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? ???????? / Uyghurche Vèneto Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Walon ?? Winaray Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?????? ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 6 April 2017, at 14:10. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Introduction |||Wikipedia:Introduction From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Help:Contents Introduction   Learn more about editing   Explore Wikipedia   Tutorial What is Wikipedia? Play media A short video about the satisfaction editors get from contributing Wikipedia is a free encyclopedia, written collaboratively by the people who use it. It is a special type of website designed to make collaboration easy, called a wiki. Many people are constantly improving Wikipedia, making thousands of changes per hour. All of these changes are recorded in article histories and recent changes. For a more detailed account of the project, see About Wikipedia. How you can contribute Click "Edit" to change an article Play media Editing tutorial for Wikipedia Don't be afraid to edit – anyone can edit almost every page, and we are encouraged to be bold! Find something that can be improved and make it better—for example, spelling, grammar, rewriting for readability, adding content, or removing non-constructive edits. If you wish to add new facts, please try to provide references so they may be verified, or suggest them on the article's discussion page. Changes to controversial topics and Wikipedia's main pages should usually be discussed first. Contributing to Wikipedia will provide you with resources on all the basics needed to use, comment on, and contribute to Wikipedia. Remember – you can't break Wikipedia; all edits can be reversed, fixed or improved later. Wikipedia is allowed to be imperfect. So go ahead, edit an article and help make Wikipedia the best information source on the Internet! Donate – Wikipedia is free to use, but relies on donations and grants to do so. Please consider donating using the Donate to Wikipedia link on the left to help with the project's running costs and expansion. Why not try out the editor right now? Click here to edit the sandbox, a place to make test edits. (If there is already some text there, add to the end of the text.) Type some text. Click Show preview to test your changes, or Save page when you're happy with the way it looks. Next: Learn more about editing ? Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Introduction&oldid=680454568" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia quick introductions Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Afrikaans Alemannisch Ænglisc ??????? ??????? ???? ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski ?????? Català Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ??????? ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano ????? Kapampangan ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî Ladino ??? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Limburgs Magyar ?????????? ?????? ???? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ??? Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ???? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Romani Runa Simi ??????? Sámegiella ????????? Sardu Scots Sicilianu Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ??? Türkçe ?????? ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 10 September 2015, at 23:28. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:Statistics |||Statistics Jump to: navigation, search Page statistics Content pages 5,393,672 Pages (All pages in the wiki, including talk pages, redirects, etc.) 41,989,774 Uploaded files 844,757 Edit statistics Page edits since Wikipedia was set up 886,656,324 Average edits per page 21.12 User statistics Registered users 30,796,067 Active registered users (list of members) (Users who have performed an action in the last 30 days) 135,691 Bots (list of members) 314 Administrators (list of members) 1,263 Bureaucrats (list of members) 22 Pending changes reviewers (list of members) 6,772 Stewards (list of members) 0 Account creators (list of members) 342 Importers (list of members) 2 Transwiki importers (list of members) 0 IP block exemptions (list of members) 164 Oversighters (list of members) 50 Founder (list of members) 1 Rollbackers (list of members) 5,723 Autopatrolled (list of members) 3,647 Researchers (list of members) 10 File movers (list of members) 397 Checkusers (list of members) 39 Template editors (list of members) 154 Mass message senders (list of members) 47 Extended confirmed users (list of members) 33,796 Page movers (list of members) 132 New page reviewers (list of members) 392 Edit filter managers (list of members) 169 Confirmed users (list of members) 481 Course coordinators (list of members) 24 Course online volunteers (list of members) 91 Course campus volunteers (list of members) 104 Course instructors (list of members) 215 Other statistics Queued mass messages 0 Other statistics Internal statistics See here for the job queue statistic ("jobs") Special:ValidationStatistics: Pending changes statistics See also Wikipedia:Statistics and Category:Wikipedia statistics for a fuller list of pages that provide, analyze or discuss Wikipedia statistics. External statistics Most viewed pages Site traffic statistics Article traffic statistics Wikipedia Statistics - Tables - English Alexa traffic analysis for Wikipedia Wikipedia.org is more popular than... Other Wikipedias Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. More than 1,000,000 articles: Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands ??? Polski ??????? Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t More than 250,000 articles: ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Català ?eština Euskara ????? ??? Magyar Norsk bokmål Português Român? Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe ?????????? ?? More than 50,000 articles: Bosanski ????????? Dansk Eesti ???????? English (simple form) Esperanto Galego ????? Hrvatski Latviešu Lietuvi? Norsk nynorsk Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ??? Complete list of Wikipedias Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:Statistics" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Special page Variants Views More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools Upload file Special pages Printable version Languages Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/English_language |||English language From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For other uses, see English (disambiguation). English Pronunciation /????l??/[1] Region Originally England now worldwide (see Geographical distribution, below) Native speakers 360–400 million (2006)[2] L2 speakers: 400 million; as a foreign language: 600–700 million[2] Language family Indo-European Germanic West Germanic Ingvaeonic Anglo-Frisian Anglic English Early forms Old English Middle English Early Modern English Writing system Latin script (English alphabet) English Braille, Unified English Braille Signed forms Manually coded English (multiple systems) Official status Official language in 67 countries 27 non-sovereign entities Various organisations United Nations European Union Commonwealth of Nations Council of Europe ICC IOC ISO NATO WTO NAFTA OAS OECD OIC OPEC GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development* PIF UKUSA Agreement ASEAN ASEAN Economic Community SAARC Turkic Council ECO Language codes ISO 639-1 en ISO 639-2 eng ISO 639-3 eng Glottolog stan1293[3] Linguasphere 52-ABA   Countries of the world where English is a majority native language   Countries where English is official but not a majority native language This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. English i/????l??/ is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and is now the global lingua franca.[4][5] Named after the Angles, one of the Germanic tribes that migrated to England, it ultimately derives its name from the Anglia (Angeln) peninsula in the Baltic Sea. It is most closely related to the Frisian languages, but its vocabulary has been significantly influenced by other Germanic languages in the early medieval period, and later by Romance languages, particularly Latin and French.[6] English is either the official language or one of the official languages in almost 60 sovereign states. It is the most commonly spoken language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland, and New Zealand, and is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa, and South Asia.[7] It is the third most common native language in the world, after Mandarin and Spanish.[8] It is the most widely learned second language and an official language of the United Nations, of the European Union, and of many other world and regional international organisations. It is the most widely spoken Germanic language, accounting for at least 70% of speakers of this Indo-European branch. English has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a set of Anglo-Frisian dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the fifth century, are called Old English. Middle English began in the late 11th century with the Norman conquest of England, and was a period in which the language was influenced by French.[9] Early Modern English began in the late 15th century with the introduction of the printing press to London and the King James Bible, and the start of the Great Vowel Shift.[10] Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, modern English spread around the world from the 17th to mid-20th centuries. Through all types of printed and electronic media, as well as the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and in professional contexts such as science, navigation, and law.[11] Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern with a rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order, to a mostly analytic pattern with little inflection, a fairly fixed SVO word order and a complex syntax.[12] Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation. Despite noticeable variation among the accents and dialects of English used in different countries and regions – in terms of phonetics and phonology, and sometimes also vocabulary, grammar and spelling – English-speakers from around the world are able to communicate with one another with relative ease. Contents 1 Classification 2 History 2.1 Proto-Germanic to Old English 2.2 Middle English 2.3 Early Modern English 2.4 Spread of Modern English 3 Geographical distribution 3.1 Three circles of English-speaking countries 3.2 Pluricentric English 3.3 English as a global language 4 Phonology 4.1 Consonants 4.2 Vowels 4.3 Phonotactics 4.4 Stress, rhythm and intonation 4.5 Regional variation 5 Grammar 5.1 Nouns and noun phrases 5.1.1 Adjectives 5.1.2 Pronouns, case and person 5.1.3 Prepositions 5.2 Verbs and verb phrases 5.2.1 Tense, aspect and mood 5.2.2 Phrasal verbs 5.2.3 Adverbs 5.3 Syntax 5.3.1 Basic constituent order 5.3.2 Clause syntax 5.3.3 Auxiliary verb constructions 5.3.4 Questions 5.3.5 Discourse level syntax 6 Vocabulary 6.1 Word formation processes 6.2 Word origins 6.3 English loanwords and calques in other languages 7 Writing system 8 Dialects, accents, and varieties 8.1 UK and Ireland 8.2 North America 8.3 Australia and New Zealand 8.4 Africa, the Caribbean, and South Asia 9 References 10 Bibliography 11 External links Classification The Germanic languages in Europe The Anglo-Frisian languages   English   Scots   West Frisian   North Frisian   Saterland Frisian Phylogenetic tree showing the historical relations between the languages of the West Germanic branch of the Germanic languages English is an Indo-European language, and belongs to the West Germanic group of the Germanic languages.[13] Most closely related to English are the three Frisian languages: West Frisian, North Frisian and Saterland Frisian, with which English forms the Anglo-Frisian subgroup within West Germanic. Low German (Low Saxon) (nr. 19-24 on the map), which evolved from Old Saxon, is also closely related, and sometimes Low German, English, and Frisian are grouped together as the Ingvaeonic (North Sea Germanic) languages.[14] Furthermore, English is closely related to German, Dutch and Afrikaans. While Dutch and Afrikaans are classified as Franconian languages (nr. 25, 29 and 32), Standard German is based on Thuringian-Upper Saxon dialects (nr. 30), and therefore is more closely related to the North Sea Germanic languages. Since the Central German dialects (nr. 29-31) Standard German is based on, were, other than English, Dutch and Afrikaans (and also Low German), affected by the High German consonant shift, German seems more distantly related to English than Dutch and Afrikaans, since cognates often are not so easily recognizable, but still, English and German resemble each other to a high degree: English: The white wise flying ghost was friendly and his best friend was the green frog who sat under the elm and sang. German: Der weiße weise fliegende Geist war freundlich und sein bester Freund war der grüne Frosch der unter der Ulme saß und sang. Modern English descends from Middle English, which in turn descends from Old English.[15] Particular dialects of Old and Middle English also developed into a number of other English (Anglic) languages, including Scots[16] and the extinct Fingallian and Forth and Bargy (Yola) dialects of Ireland.[17] English is classified as a Germanic language because it shares new language features (different from other Indo-European languages) with other Germanic languages such as Dutch, German, and Swedish.[18] These shared innovations show that the languages have descended from a single common ancestor, which linguists call Proto-Germanic. Some shared features of Germanic languages are the use of modal verbs, the division of verbs into strong and weak classes, and the sound changes affecting Proto-Indo-European consonants, known as Grimm's and Verner's laws. Through Grimm's law, the word for foot begins with /f/ in Germanic languages, but its cognates in other Indo-European languages begin with /p/. English is classified as an Anglo-Frisian language because Frisian and English share other features, such as the palatalisation of consonants that were velar consonants in Proto-Germanic (see Phonological history of Old English § Palatalization).[19] English sing, sang, sung; Dutch zingen, zong, gezongen; German singen, sang, gesungen (strong verb) English laugh, laughed; Dutch and German lachen, lachte (weak verb) English foot, Dutch voet, German Fuß, Norwegian and Swedish fot (initial /f/ derived from Proto-Indo-European *p through Grimm's law) Latin pes, stem ped-; Modern Greek ???? pódi; Russian ??? pod; Sanskrit ??? pád (original Proto-Indo-European *p) English cheese, Frisian tsiis (ch and ts from palatalisation) German Käse and Dutch kaas (k without palatalisation) English, like the other insular Germanic languages, Icelandic and Faroese, developed independently of the continental Germanic languages and their influences. English is thus not mutually intelligible with any continental Germanic language, differing in vocabulary, syntax, and phonology, although some, such as Dutch, do show strong affinities with English, especially with its earlier stages.[20] Because English through its history has changed considerably in response to contact with other languages, particularly Old Norse and Norman French, some scholars have argued that English can be considered a mixed language or a creole – a theory called the Middle English creole hypothesis. Although the high degree of influence from these languages on the vocabulary and grammar of Modern English is widely acknowledged, most specialists in language contact do not consider English to be a true mixed language.[21][22] History Main article: History of the English language Proto-Germanic to Old English Main article: Old English The opening to the Old English epic poem Beowulf, handwritten in half-uncial script: H?æt ?? G?rde/na ing?ar dagum þ?od cyninga / þrym ge frunon... "Listen! We of the Spear-Danes from days of yore have heard of the glory of the folk-kings..." The earliest form of English is called Old English or Anglo-Saxon (c. 550–1066 CE). Old English developed from a set of North Sea Germanic dialects originally spoken along the coasts of Frisia, Lower Saxony, Jutland, and Southern Sweden by Germanic tribes known as the Angles, Saxons, and Jutes. In the fifth century, the Anglo-Saxons settled Britain and the Romans withdrew from Britain. By the seventh century, the Germanic language of the Anglo-Saxons became dominant in Britain, replacing the languages of Roman Britain (43–409 CE): Common Brittonic, a Celtic language, and Latin, brought to Britain by the Roman occupation.[23][24][25] England and English (originally Ænglaland and Ænglisc) are named after the Angles.[26] Old English was divided into four dialects: the Anglian dialects, Mercian and Northumbrian, and the Saxon dialects, Kentish and West Saxon.[27] Through the educational reforms of King Alfred in the ninth century and the influence of the kingdom of Wessex, the West Saxon dialect became the standard written variety.[28] The epic poem Beowulf is written in West Saxon, and the earliest English poem, Cædmon's Hymn, is written in Northumbrian.[29] Modern English developed mainly from Mercian, but the Scots language developed from Northumbrian. A few short inscriptions from the early period of Old English were written using a runic script.[30] By the sixth century, a Latin alphabet was adopted, written with half-uncial letterforms. It included the runic letters wynn ??? and thorn ?þ?, and the modified Latin letters eth ?ð?, and ash ?æ?.[30][31] Old English is very different from Modern English and difficult for 21st-century English speakers to understand. Its grammar was similar to that of modern German, and its closest relative is Old Frisian. Nouns, adjectives, pronouns, and verbs had many more inflectional endings and forms, and word order was much freer than in Modern English. Modern English has case forms in pronouns (he, him, his) and a few verb endings (I have, he has), but Old English had case endings in nouns as well, and verbs had more person and number endings.[32][33][34] The translation of Matthew 8:20 from 1000 CE shows examples of case endings (nominative plural, accusative plural, genitive singular) and a verb ending (present plural): Foxas habbað holu and heofonan fuglas nest Fox-as habb-að hol-u and heofon-an fugl-as nest-? fox-NOM.PL have-PRS.PL hole-ACC.PL and heaven-GEN.SG bird-NOM.PL nest-ACC.PL "Foxes have holes and the birds of heaven nests"[35] Middle English Main article: Middle English Englischmen þeyz hy hadde fram þe bygynnyng þre manner speche, Souþeron, Northeron, and Myddel speche in þe myddel of þe lond, … Noþeles by comyxstion and mellyng, furst wiþ Danes, and afterward wiþ Normans, in menye þe contray longage ys asperyed, and som vseþ strange wlaffyng, chyteryng, harryng, and garryng grisbytting. Although, from the beginning, Englishmen had three manners of speaking, southern, northern and midlands speech in the middle of the country, … Nevertheless, through intermingling and mixing, first with Danes and then with Normans, amongst many the country language has arisen, and some use strange stammering, chattering, snarling, and grating gnashing. “ ” John of Trevisa, ca. 1385[36] In the period from the 8th to the 12th century, Old English gradually transformed through language contact into Middle English. Middle English is often arbitrarily defined as beginning with the conquest of England by William the Conqueror in 1066, but it developed further in the period from 1200–1450. First, the waves of Norse colonisation of northern parts of the British Isles in the 8th and 9th centuries put Old English into intense contact with Old Norse, a North Germanic language. Norse influence was strongest in the Northeastern varieties of Old English spoken in the Danelaw area around York, which was the centre of Norse colonisation; today these features are still particularly present in Scots and Northern English. However the centre of norsified English seems to have been in the Midlands around Lindsey, and after 920 CE when Lindsey was reincorporated into the Anglo-Saxon polity, Norse features spread from there into English varieties that had not been in intense contact with Norse speakers. Some elements of Norse influence that persist in all English varieties today are the pronouns beginning with th- (they, them, their) which replaced the Anglo-Saxon pronouns with h- (hie, him, hera).[37] With the Norman conquest of England in 1066, the now norsified Old English language was subject to contact with the Old Norman language, a Romance language closely related to Modern French. The Norman language in England eventually developed into Anglo-Norman. Because Norman was spoken primarily by the elites and nobles, while the lower classes continued speaking Anglo-Saxon, the influence of Norman consisted of introducing a wide range of loanwords related to politics, legislation and prestigious social domains.[38] Middle English also greatly simplified the inflectional system, probably in order to reconcile Old Norse and Old English, which were inflectionally different but morphologically similar. The distinction between nominative and accusative case was lost except in personal pronouns, the instrumental case was dropped, and the use of the genitive case was limited to describing possession. The inflectional system regularised many irregular inflectional forms,[39] and gradually simplified the system of agreement, making word order less flexible.[40] By the Wycliffe Bible of the 1380s, the passage Matthew 8:20 was written Foxis han dennes, and briddis of heuene han nestis[41] Here the plural suffix -n on the verb have is still retained, but none of the case endings on the nouns are present. By the 12th century Middle English was fully developed, integrating both Norse and Norman features; it continued to be spoken until the transition to early Modern English around 1500. Middle English literature includes Geoffrey Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales, and Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur. In the Middle English period the use of regional dialects in writing proliferated, and dialect traits were even used for effect by authors such as Chaucer. Early Modern English Main article: Early Modern English Graphic representation of the Great Vowel Shift, showing how the pronunciation of the long vowels gradually shifted, with the high vowels i: and u: breaking into diphthongs and the lower vowels each shifting their pronunciation up one level The next period in the history of English was Early Modern English (1500–1700). Early Modern English was characterised by the Great Vowel Shift (1350–1700), inflectional simplification, and linguistic standardisation. The Great Vowel Shift affected the stressed long vowels of Middle English. It was a chain shift, meaning that each shift triggered a subsequent shift in the vowel system. Mid and open vowels were raised, and close vowels were broken into diphthongs. For example, the word bite was originally pronounced as the word beet is today, and the second vowel in the word about was pronounced as the word boot is today. The Great Vowel Shift explains many irregularities in spelling, since English retains many spellings from Middle English, and it also explains why English vowel letters have very different pronunciations from the same letters in other languages.[42][43] English began to rise in prestige during the reign of Henry V. Around 1430, the Court of Chancery in Westminster began using English in its official documents, and a new standard form of Middle English, known as Chancery Standard, developed from the dialects of London and the East Midlands. In 1476, William Caxton introduced the printing press to England and began publishing the first printed books in London, expanding the influence of this form of English.[44] Literature from the Early Modern period includes the works of William Shakespeare and the translation of the Bible commissioned by King James I. Even after the vowel shift the language still sounded different from Modern English: for example, the consonant clusters /kn ?n sw/ in knight, gnat, and sword were still pronounced. Many of the grammatical features that a modern reader of Shakespeare might find quaint or archaic represent the distinct characteristics of Early Modern English.[45] In the 1611 King James Version of the Bible, written in Early Modern English, Matthew 8:20 says: The Foxes haue holes and the birds of the ayre haue nests[35] This exemplifies the loss of case and its effects on sentence structure (replacement with Subject-Verb-Object word order, and the use of of instead of the non-possessive genitive), and the introduction of loanwords from French (ayre) and word replacements (bird originally meaning "nestling" had replaced OE fugol). Spread of Modern English By the late 18th century, the British Empire had facilitated the spread of English through its colonies and geopolitical dominance. Commerce, science and technology, diplomacy, art, and formal education all contributed to English becoming the first truly global language. English also facilitated worldwide international communication.[46][47] As England continued to form new colonies, these in turn became independent and developed their own norms for how to speak and write the language. English was adopted in North America, India, parts of Africa, Australasia, and many other regions. In the post-colonial period, some of the newly created nations that had multiple indigenous languages opted to continue using English as the official language to avoid the political difficulties inherent in promoting any one indigenous language above the others.[48][49][50] In the 20th century the growing economic and cultural influence of the United States and its status as a superpower following the Second World War has, along with worldwide broadcasting in English by the BBC[51] and other broadcasters, significantly accelerated the spread of the language across the planet.[52][53] By the 21st century, English was more widely spoken and written than any language has ever been.[54] A major feature in the early development of Modern English was the codification of explicit norms for standard usage, and their dissemination through official media such as public education and state sponsored publications. In 1755 Samuel Johnson published his A Dictionary of the English Language which introduced a standard set of spelling conventions and usage norms. In 1828, Noah Webster published the American Dictionary of the English language in an effort to establish a norm for speaking and writing American English that was independent from the British standard. Within Britain, non-standard or lower class dialect features were increasingly stigmatised, leading to the quick spread of the prestige varieties among the middle classes.[55] In terms of grammatical evolution, Modern English has now reached a stage where the loss of case is almost complete (case is now only found in pronouns, such as he and him, she and her, who and whom), and where SVO word-order is mostly fixed.[55] Some changes, such as the use of do-support have become universalised. (Earlier English did not use the word "do" as a general auxiliary as Modern English does; at first it was only used in question constructions where it was not obligatory.[56] Now, do-support with the verb have is becoming increasingly standardised.) The use of progressive forms in -ing, appears to be spreading to new constructions, and forms such as had been being built are becoming more common. Regularisation of irregular forms also slowly continues (e.g. dreamed instead of dreamt), and analytical alternatives to inflectional forms are becoming more common (e.g. more polite instead of politer). British English is also undergoing change under the influence of American English, fuelled by the strong presence of American English in the media and the prestige associated with the US as a world power. [57][58][59] Geographical distribution See also: List of territorial entities where English is an official language, List of countries by English-speaking population, and English-speaking world Percentage of English speakers by country.   80-100%   60-80%   40-60%   20-40%    0-20%   Not available As of 2016, 400 million people spoke English as their first language, and 1.1 billion spoke it as a secondary language.[60] English is probably the third largest language by number of native speakers, after Mandarin and Spanish.[8] However, when combining native and non-native speakers it may, depending on the estimate used, be the most commonly spoken language in the world.[54][61][62][63] English is spoken by communities on every continent and on oceanic islands in all the major oceans.[64] The countries in which English is spoken can be grouped into different categories by how English is used in each country. The "inner circle"[65] countries with many native speakers of English share an international standard of written English and jointly influence speech norms of English around the world. English does not belong to just one country, and it does not belong solely to descendants of English settlers. English is an official language of countries populated by few descendants of native speakers of English. It has also become by far the most important language of international communication when people who share no native language meet anywhere in the world. Three circles of English-speaking countries Braj Kachru distinguishes countries where English is spoken with a three circles model.[65] In his model, the "inner circle" countries are countries with large communities of native speakers of English, "outer circle" countries have small communities of native speakers of English but widespread use of English as a second language in education or broadcasting or for local official purposes, and "expanding circle" countries are countries where many learners learn English as a foreign language. Kachru bases his model on the history of how English spread in different countries, how users acquire English, and the range of uses English has in each country. The three circles change membership over time.[66] Braj Kachru's Three Circles of English. Countries with large communities of native speakers of English (the inner circle) include Britain, the United States, Australia, Canada, Ireland, and New Zealand, where the majority speaks English, and South Africa, where a significant minority speaks English. The countries with the most native English speakers are, in descending order, the United States (at least 231 million),[67] the United Kingdom (60 million),[68][69][70] Canada (19 million),[71] Australia (at least 17 million),[72] South Africa (4.8 million),[73] Ireland (4.2 million), and New Zealand (3.7 million).[74] In these countries, children of native speakers learn English from their parents, and local people who speak other languages or new immigrants learn English to communicate in their neighbourhoods and workplaces.[75] The inner-circle countries provide the base from which English spreads to other countries in the world.[66] Estimates of the number of English speakers who are second language and foreign-language speakers vary greatly from 470 million to more than 1,000 million depending on how proficiency is defined.[7] Linguist David Crystal estimates that non-native speakers now outnumber native speakers by a ratio of 3 to 1.[61] In Kachru's three-circles model, the "outer circle" countries are countries such as the Philippines,[76] Jamaica,[77] India, Pakistan[citation needed], Singapore,[78] and Nigeria[79][80] with a much smaller proportion of native speakers of English but much use of English as a second language for education, government, or domestic business, and where English is routinely used for school instruction and official interactions with the government.[81] Those countries have millions of native speakers of dialect continua ranging from an English-based creole to a more standard version of English. They have many more speakers of English who acquire English in the process of growing up through day by day use and listening to broadcasting, especially if they attend schools where English is the medium of instruction. Varieties of English learned by speakers who are not native speakers born to English-speaking parents may be influenced, especially in their grammar, by the other languages spoken by those learners.[75] Most of those varieties of English include words little used by native speakers of English in the inner-circle countries,[75] and they may have grammatical and phonological differences from inner-circle varieties as well. The standard English of the inner-circle countries is often taken as a norm for use of English in the outer-circle countries.[75] In the three-circles model, countries such as Poland, China, Brazil, Germany, Japan, Indonesia, Egypt, and other countries where English is taught as a foreign language make up the "expanding circle".[82] The distinctions between English as a first language, as a second language, and as a foreign language are often debatable and may change in particular countries over time.[81] For example, in the Netherlands and some other countries of Europe, knowledge of English as a second language is nearly universal, with over 80 percent of the population able to use it,[83] and thus English is routinely used to communicate with foreigners and often in higher education. In these countries, although English is not used for government business, the widespread use of English in these countries puts them at the boundary between the "outer circle" and "expanding circle". English is unusual among world languages in how many of its users are not native speakers but speakers of English as a second or foreign language.[84] Many users of English in the expanding circle use it to communicate with other people from the expanding circle, so that interaction with native speakers of English plays no part in their decision to use English.[85] Non-native varieties of English are widely used for international communication, and speakers of one such variety often encounter features of other varieties.[86] Very often today a conversation in English anywhere in the world may include no native speakers of English at all, even while including speakers from several different countries.[87] Pie chart showing the percentage of native English speakers living in "inner circle" English-speaking countries. Native speakers are now substantially outnumbered worldwide by second-language speakers of English (not counted in this chart).   US (64.3%)   UK (16.7%)   Canada (5.3%)   Australia (4.7%)   South Africa (1.3%)   Ireland (1.1%)   New Zealand (1%)   Other (5.6%) Pluricentric English English is a pluricentric language, which means that no one national authority sets the standard for use of the language.[88][89][90][91] But English is not a divided language,[92] despite a long-standing joke originally attributed to George Bernard Shaw that the United Kingdom and the United States are "two countries separated by a common language".[93] Spoken English, for example English used in broadcasting, generally follows national pronunciation standards that are also established by custom rather than by regulation. International broadcasters are usually identifiable as coming from one country rather than another through their accents,[94] but newsreader scripts are also composed largely in international standard written English. The norms of standard written English are maintained purely by the consensus of educated English-speakers around the world, without any oversight by any government or international organisation.[95] American listeners generally readily understand most British broadcasting, and British listeners readily understand most American broadcasting. Most English speakers around the world can understand radio programmes, television programmes, and films from many parts of the English-speaking world.[96] Both standard and nonstandard varieties of English can include both formal or informal styles, distinguished by word choice and syntax and use both technical and non-technical registers.[97] The settlement history of the English-speaking inner circle countries outside Britain helped level dialect distinctions and produce koineised forms of English in South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand.[98] The majority of immigrants to the United States without British ancestry rapidly adopted English after arrival. Now the majority of the United States population are monolingual English speakers,[99][67] although English has been given official status by only 30 of the 50 state governments of the US.[100][101] English as a global language English has ceased to be an "English language" in the sense of belonging only to people who are ethnically English.[102][103] Use of English is growing country-by-country internally and for international communication. Most people learn English for practical rather than ideological reasons.[104] Many speakers of English in Africa have become part of an "Afro-Saxon" language community that unites Africans from different countries.[105] As decolonisation proceeded throughout the British Empire in the 1950s and 1960s, former colonies often did not reject English but rather continued to use it as independent countries setting their own language policies.[49][50][106] For example, the view of the English language among many Indians has gone from associating it with colonialism to associating it with economic progress, and English continues to be an official language of India.[107] English is also widely used in media and literature, and the number of English language books published annually in India is the third largest in the world after the US and UK.[108] However English is rarely spoken as a first language, numbering only around a couple hundred-thousand people, and less than 5% of the population speak fluent English in India.[109][110] David Crystal claimed in 2004 that, combining native and non-native speakers, India now has more people who speak or understand English than any other country in the world,[111] but the number of English speakers in India is very uncertain, with most scholars concluding that the United States still has more speakers of English than India.[112] Modern English, sometimes described as the first global lingua franca,[52][113] is also regarded as the first world language.[114][115] English is the world's most widely used language in newspaper publishing, book publishing, international telecommunications, scientific publishing, international trade, mass entertainment, and diplomacy.[115] English is, by international treaty, the basis for the required controlled natural languages[116] Seaspeak and Airspeak, used as international languages of seafaring[117] and aviation.[118] English used to have parity with French & German in scientific research, but now it dominates that field.[119] It achieved parity with French as a language of diplomacy at the Treaty of Versailles negotiations in 1919.[120] By the time of the foundation of the United Nations at the end of World War II, English had become pre-eminent [121] and is now the main worldwide language of diplomacy and international relations.[122] It is one of six official languages of the United Nations.[123] Many other worldwide international organisations, including the International Olympic Committee, specify English as a working language or official language of the organisation. Many regional international organisations such as the European Free Trade Association, Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),[53] and Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) set English as their organisation's sole working language even though most members are not countries with a majority of native English speakers. While the European Union (EU) allows member states to designate any of the national languages as an official language of the Union, in practice English is the main working language of EU organisations.[124] Although in most countries English is not an official language, it is currently the language most often taught as a foreign language.[52][53] In the countries of the EU, English is the most widely spoken foreign language in nineteen of the twenty-five member states where it is not an official language (that is, the countries other than the UK, Ireland and Malta). In a 2012 official Eurobarometer poll, 38 percent of the EU respondents outside the countries where English is an official language said they could speak English well enough to have a conversation in that language. The next most commonly mentioned foreign language, French (which is the most widely known foreign language in the UK and Ireland), could be used in conversation by 12 percent of respondents.[125] A working knowledge of English has become a requirement in a number of occupations and professions such as medicine[126] and computing. English has become so important in scientific publishing that more than 80 percent of all scientific journal articles indexed by Chemical Abstracts in 1998 were written in English, as were 90 percent of all articles in natural science publications by 1996 and 82 percent of articles in humanities publications by 1995.[127] Specialised subsets of English arise spontaneously in international communities, for example, among international business people, as an auxiliary language. This has led some scholars to develop the study of English as an auxiliary languages. Globish uses a relatively small subset of English vocabulary (about 1500 words with highest use in international business English) in combination with the standard English grammar. Other examples include Simple English. The increased use of the English language globally has had an effect on other languages, leading to some English words being assimilated into the vocabularies of other languages. This influence of English has led to concerns about language death,[128] and to claims of linguistic imperialism,[129] and has provoked resistance to the spread of English; however the number of speakers continues to increase because many people around the world think that English provides them with opportunities for better employment and improved lives.[130] Although some scholars mention a possibility of future divergence of English dialects into mutually unintelligible languages, most think a more likely outcome is that English will continue to function as a koineised language in which the standard form unifies speakers from around the world.[131] English is used as the language for wider communication in countries around the world.[132] Thus English has grown in worldwide use much more than any constructed language proposed as an international auxiliary language, including Esperanto.[133][134] Phonology Main article: English phonology The phonetics and phonology of English differ between dialects, usually without interfering with mutual communication. Phonological variation affects the inventory of phonemes (speech sounds that distinguish meaning), and phonetic variation is differences in pronunciation of the phonemes.[135] This overview mainly describes the standard pronunciations of the United Kingdom and the United States: Received Pronunciation (RP) and General American (GA) (See Section below on "Dialects, accents and varieties"). The phonetic symbols used below are from the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA).[136][137][138] Consonants Main article: English phonology § Consonants Most English dialects share the same 24 consonant phonemes. The consonant inventory shown below is valid for Californian American English,[139] and for RP.[140] Consonant phonemes Labial Dental Alveolar Post- alveolar Palatal Velar Glottal Nasal m n ? Stop p b t d k ? Affricate t? d? Fricative f v ? ð s z ? ? h Approximant ?* j w Lateral l * Conventionally transcribed /r/. In the table, when obstruents (stops, affricates, and fricatives) appear in pairs, such as /p b/, /t? d?/, and /s z/, the first is fortis (strong) and the second is lenis (weak). Fortis obstruents, such as /p t? s/ are pronounced with more muscular tension and breath force than lenis consonants, such as /b d? z/, and are always voiceless. Lenis consonants are partly voiced at the beginning and end of utterances, and fully voiced between vowels. Fortis stops such as /p/ have additional articulatory or acoustic features in most dialects: they are aspirated [p?] when they occur alone at the beginning of a stressed syllable, often unaspirated in other cases, and often unreleased [p? ] or pre-glottalised [?p] at the end of a syllable. In a single-syllable word, a vowel before a fortis stop is shortened: thus nip has a noticeably shorter vowel (phonetically, but not phonemically) than nib [n??p?] (see below).[141] lenis stops: bin [b???n], about [??ba?t], nib [n??b?] fortis stops: pin [?p??n], spin [sp?n], happy [?hæpi], nip [?nip? ] or [?ni?p] In RP, the lateral approximant /l/, has two main allophones (pronunciation variants): the clear or plain [l], as in light, and the dark or velarised [?], as in full.[142] GA has dark l in most cases.[143] clear l: RP light [la?t] dark l: RP and GA full [f??], GA light [?a?t] All sonorants (liquids /l, r/ and nasals /m, n, ?/) devoice when following a voiceless obstruent, and they are syllabic when following a consonant at the end of a word.[144] voiceless sonorants: clay [?kl????] and snow [?sn?o?] syllabic sonorants: paddle [pad.l?], and button [b?t.n?] Vowels Main article: English phonology § Vowels The pronunciation of vowels varies a great deal between dialects and is one of the most detectable aspects of a speaker's accent. The table below lists the vowel phonemes in Received Pronunciation (RP) and General American (GA), with examples of words in which they occur from lexical sets compiled by linguists. The vowels are represented with symbols from the International Phonetic Alphabet; those given for RP are standard in British dictionaries and other publications. monophthongs RP GA word i? i need ? bid e ? bed æ back monophthongs RP GA word (?) ? roses ? comma ?? ?r bird ? but monophthongs RP GA word u? u food ? good ?? ? paw ? cloth ? box ?? bra diphthongs RP GA word e? bay ?? o? road a? cry a? cow ?? boy In RP, vowel length is phonemic; long vowels are marked with a triangular colon ??? in the table above, such as the vowel of need [ni?d] as opposed to bid [b?d]. GA does not have long vowels. In both RP and GA, vowels are phonetically shortened before fortis consonants in the same syllable, like /t t? f/, but not before lenis consonants like /d d? v/ or in open syllables: thus, the vowels of rich [r??t?], neat [ni?t], and safe [s???f] are noticeably shorter than the vowels of ridge [r?d?], need [ni?d], and save [se?v], and the vowel of light [l???t] is shorter than that of lie [la?]. Because lenis consonants are frequently voiceless at the end of a syllable, vowel length is an important cue as to whether the following consonant is lenis or fortis.[145] The vowels /? ?/ only occur in unstressed syllables and are a result of vowel reduction. Some dialects do not distinguish them, so that roses and comma end in the same vowel, a dialect feature called weak-vowel merger. GA has an unstressed r-coloured schwa /?/, as in butter [?b?t?], which in RP has the same vowel as the word-final vowel in comma. Phonotactics An English syllable includes a syllable nucleus consisting of a vowel sound. Syllable onset and coda (start and end) are optional. A syllable can start with up to three consonant sounds, as in sprint /spr?nt/, and end with up to four, as in texts /teksts/. This gives an English syllable the following structure, (CCC)V(CCCC) where C represents a consonant and V a vowel. The consonants that may appear together in onsets or codas are restricted, as is the order in which they may appear. Onsets can only have four types of consonant clusters: a stop and approximant, as in play; a voiceless fricative and approximant, as in fly or sly; s and a voiceless stop, as in stay; and s, a voiceless stop, and an approximant, as in string.[146] Clusters of nasal and stop are only allowed in codas. Clusters of obstruents always agree in voicing, and clusters of sibilants and of plosives with the same point of articulation are prohibited. Furthermore, several consonants have limited distributions: /h/ can only occur in syllable initial position, and /?/ only in syllable final position.[147] Stress, rhythm and intonation See also: Stress and vowel reduction in English and Intonation in English Stress plays an important role in English. Certain syllables are stressed, while others are unstressed. Stress is a combination of duration, intensity, vowel quality, and sometimes changes in pitch. Stressed syllables are pronounced longer and louder than unstressed syllables, and vowels in unstressed syllables are frequently reduced while vowels in stressed syllables are not.[148] Some words, primarily short function words but also some modal verbs such as can, have weak and strong forms depending on whether they occur in stressed or non-stressed position within a sentence. Stress in English is phonemic, and some pairs of words are distinguished by stress. For instance, the word contract is stressed on the first syllable (/?k?ntrækt/ KON-trakt) when used as a noun, but on the last syllable (/k?n?trækt/ k?n-TRAKT) for most meanings (for example, "reduce in size") when used as a verb.[149][150][151] Here stress is connected to vowel reduction: in the noun "contract" the first syllable is stressed and has the unreduced vowel /?/, but in the verb "contract" the first syllable is unstressed and its vowel is reduced to /?/. Stress is also used to distinguish between words and phrases, so that a compound word receives a single stress unit, but the corresponding phrase has two: e.g. to búrn óut versus a búrnout, and a hótdog versus a hót dóg.[152] In terms of rhythm, English is generally described as a stress-timed language, meaning that the amount of time between stressed syllables tends to be equal. Stressed syllables are pronounced longer, but unstressed syllables (syllables between stresses) are shortened. Vowels in unstressed syllables are shortened as well, and vowel shortening causes changes in vowel quality: vowel reduction. Regional variation Varieties of Standard English and their features[153] Phonological features United States Canada Republic of Ireland Northern Ireland Scotland England Wales South Africa Australia New Zealand father–bother merger yes yes /?/ is unrounded yes yes yes /??r/ is pronounced [?] yes yes yes yes cot–caught merger possibly yes possibly yes yes fool–full merger yes yes /t?d/ flapping (latter-ladder merger) yes yes possibly often rarely rarely rarely rarely yes often trap–bath split possibly possibly yes yes yes often yes non-rhotic (/r/-dropping after vowels) yes yes yes yes yes close vowels for /æ, ?/ yes yes yes /l/ can always be pronounced [?] yes yes yes yes yes yes /??r/ is fronted possibly yes yes Dialects and low vowels word RP GA Can sound change THOUGHT /?/ /?/ or /?/ /?/ cot–caught merger CLOTH /?/ lot–cloth split LOT /?/ father–bother merger PALM /??/ PLANT /æ/ /æ/ trap–bath split BATH TRAP /æ/ Varieties of English vary the most in pronunciation of vowels. The best known national varieties used as standards for education in non English-speaking countries are British (BrE) and American (AmE). Countries such as Canada, Australia, Ireland, New Zealand and South Africa have their own standard varieties which are less often used as standards for education internationally. Some differences between the various dialects are shown in the table "Varieties of Standard English and their features".[153] English has undergone many historical sound changes, some of them affecting all varieties, and others affecting only a few. Most standard varieties are affected by the Great Vowel Shift, which changed the pronunciation of long vowels, but a few dialects have slightly different results. In North America, a number of chain shifts such as the Northern Cities Vowel Shift and Canadian Shift have produced very different vowel landscapes in some regional accents. Some dialects have fewer or more consonant phonemes and phones than the standard varieties. Some conservative varieties like Scottish English have a voiceless [?] sound in whine that contrasts with the voiced [w] in wine, but most other dialects pronounce both words with voiced [w], a dialect feature called wine–whine merger. The unvoiced velar fricative sound /x/ is found in Scottish English, which distinguishes loch /l?x/ from lock /l?k/. Accents like Cockney with "h-dropping" lack the glottal fricative /h/, and dialects with th-stopping and th-fronting like African American Vernacular and Estuary English do not have the dental fricatives /?, ð/, but replace them with dental or alveolar stops /t, d/ or labiodental fricatives /f, v/.[154][155] Other changes affecting the phonology of local varieties are processes such as yod-dropping, yod-coalescence, and reduction of consonant clusters. General American and Received Pronunciation vary in their pronunciation of historical /r/ after a vowel at the end of a syllable (in the syllable coda). GA is a rhotic dialect, meaning that it pronounces /r/ at the end of a syllable, but RP is non-rhotic, meaning that it loses /r/ in that position. English dialects are classified as rhotic or non-rhotic depending on whether they elide /r/ like RP or keep it like GA.[156] There is complex dialectal variation in words with the open front and open back vowels /æ ?? ? ??/. These four vowels are only distinguished in RP, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. In GA, these vowels merge to three /æ ? ?/,[157] and in Canadian English they merge to two /æ ?/.[158] In addition, the words that have each vowel vary by dialect. The table "Dialects and open vowels" shows this variation with lexical sets in which these sounds occur. Grammar Main article: English grammar As is typical of an Indo-European language, English follows accusative morphosyntactic alignment. English distinguishes at least seven major word classes: verbs, nouns, adjectives, adverbs, determiners (i.e. articles), prepositions, and conjunctions. Some analyses add pronouns as a class separate from nouns, and subdivide conjunctions into subordinators and coordinators, and add the class of interjections.[159] English also has a rich set of auxiliary verbs, such as have and do, expressing the categories of mood and aspect. Questions are marked by do-support, wh-movement (fronting of question words beginning with wh-) and word order inversion with some verbs. Some traits typical of Germanic languages persist in English, such as the distinction between irregularly inflected strong stems inflected through ablaut (i.e. changing the vowel of the stem, as in the pairs speak/spoke and foot/feet) and weak stems inflected through affixation (such as love/loved, hand/hands). Vestiges of the case and gender system are found in the pronoun system (he/him, who/whom) and in the inflection of the copula verb to be. The seven word classes are exemplified in this sample sentence:[160] The chairman of the committee and the loquacious politician clashed violently when the meeting started Det. Noun Prep. Det. Noun Conj. Det. Adj. Noun Verb Advb. Conj. Det. Noun Verb Nouns and noun phrases English nouns are only inflected for number and possession. New nouns can be formed through derivation or compounding. They are semantically divided into proper nouns (names) and common nouns. Common nouns are in turn divided into concrete and abstract nouns, and grammatically into count nouns and mass nouns.[161] Most count nouns are inflected for plural number through the use of the plural suffix -s, but a few nouns have irregular plural forms. Mass nouns can only be pluralised through the use of a count noun classifier, e.g. one loaf of bread, two loaves of bread.[162] Regular plural formation: Singular: cat, dog Plural: cats, dogs Irregular plural formation: Singular: man, woman, foot, fish, ox, knife, mouse Plural: men, women, feet, fish, oxen, knives, mice Possession can be expressed either by the possessive enclitic -s (also traditionally called a genitive suffix), or by the preposition of. Historically the -s possessive has been used for animate nouns, whereas the of possessive has been reserved for inanimate nouns. Today this distinction is less clear, and many speakers use -s also with inanimates. Orthographically the possessive -s is separated from the noun root with an apostrophe. Possessive constructions: With -s: The woman's husband's child With of: The child of the husband of the woman Nouns can form noun phrases (NPs) where they are the syntactic head of the words that depend on them such as determiners, quantifiers, conjunctions or adjectives.[163] Noun phrases can be short, such as the man, composed only of a determiner and a noun. They can also include modifiers such as adjectives (e.g. red, tall, all) and specifiers such as determiners (e.g. the, that). But they can also tie together several nouns into a single long NP, using conjunctions such as and, or prepositions such as with, e.g. the tall man with the long red trousers and his skinny wife with the spectacles (this NP uses conjunctions, prepositions, specifiers and modifiers). Regardless of length, an NP functions as a syntactic unit. For example, the possessive enclitic can, in cases which do not lead to ambiguity, follow the entire noun phrase, as in The President of India's wife, where the enclitic follows India and not President. The class of determiners is used to specify the noun they precede in terms of definiteness, where the marks a definite noun and a or an an indefinite one. A definite noun is assumed by the speaker to be already known by the interlocutor, whereas an indefinite noun is not specified as being previously known. Quantifiers, which include one, many, some and all, are used to specify the noun in terms of quantity or number. The noun must agree with the number of the determiner, e.g. one man (sg.) but all men (pl.). Determiners are the first constituents in a noun phrase.[164] Adjectives Adjectives modify a noun by providing additional information about their referents. In English, adjectives come before the nouns they modify and after determiners.[165] In Modern English, adjectives are not inflected, and they do not agree in form with the noun they modify, as adjectives in most other Indo-European languages do. For example, in the phrases the slender boy, and many slender girls, the adjective slender does not change form to agree with either the number or gender of the noun. Some adjectives are inflected for degree of comparison, with the positive degree unmarked, the suffix -er marking the comparative, and -est marking the superlative: a small boy, the boy is smaller than the girl, that boy is the smallest. Some adjectives have irregular comparative and superlative forms, such as good, better, and best. Other adjectives have comparatives formed by periphrastic constructions, with the adverb more marking the comparative, and most marking the superlative: happier or more happy, the happiest or most happy.[166] There is some variation among speakers regarding which adjectives use inflected or periphrastic comparison, and some studies have shown a tendency for the periphrastic forms to become more common at the expense of the inflected form.[167] Pronouns, case and person English pronouns conserve many traits of case and gender inflection. The personal pronouns retain a difference between subjective and objective case in most persons (I/me, he/him, she/her, we/us, they/them) as well as a gender and animateness distinction in the third person singular (distinguishing he/she/it). The subjective case corresponds to the Old English nominative case, and the objective case is used both in the sense of the previous accusative case (in the role of patient, or direct object of a transitive verb), and in the sense of the Old English dative case (in the role of a recipient or indirect object of a transitive verb).[168][169] Subjective case is used when the pronoun is the subject of a finite clause, and otherwise the objective case is used.[170] While grammarians such as Henry Sweet[171] and Otto Jespersen[172] noted that the English cases did not correspond to the traditional Latin based system, some contemporary grammars, for example Huddleston & Pullum (2002), retain traditional labels for the cases, calling them nominative and accusative cases respectively. Possessive pronouns exist in dependent and independent forms; the dependent form functions as a determiner specifying a noun (as in my chair), while the independent form can stand alone as if it were a noun (e.g. the chair is mine).[173] The English system of grammatical person no longer has a distinction between formal and informal pronouns of address, and the forms for 2nd person plural and singular are identical except in the reflexive form. Some dialects have introduced innovative 2nd person plural pronouns such as y'all found in Southern American English and African American (Vernacular) English or youse and ye found in Irish English. English personal pronouns Person Subjective case Objective case Dependent possessive Independent possessive Reflexive 1st p. sg. I me my mine myself 2nd o. sg. you you your yours yourself 3rd p. sg. he/she/it him/her/it his/her/its his/hers/its himself/herself/itself 1st p. pl. we us our ours ourselves 2nd p. pl. you you your yours yourselves 3rd p. pl they them their theirs themselves Pronouns are used to refer to entities deictically or anaphorically. A deictic pronoun points to some person or object by identifying it relative to the speech situation — for example the pronoun I identifies the speaker, and the pronoun you, the addressee. Anaphorical pronouns such as that refer back to an entity already mentioned or assumed by the speaker to be known by the audience, for example in the sentence I already told you that. The reflexive pronouns are used when the oblique argument is identical to the subject of a phrase (e.g. "he sent it to himself" or "she braced herself for impact").[174] Prepositions Prepositional phrases (PP) are phrases composed of a preposition and one or more nouns, e.g. with the dog, for my friend, to school, in England. Prepositions have a wide range of uses in English. They are used to describe movement, place, and other relations between different entities, but they also have many syntactic uses such as introducing complement clauses and oblique arguments of verbs. For example, in the phrase I gave it to him, the preposition to marks the recipient, or Indirect Object of the verb to give. Traditionally words were only considered prepositions if they governed the case of the noun they preceded, for example causing the pronouns to use the objective rather than subjective form, "with her", "to me", "for us". But some contemporary grammars such as that of Huddleston & Pullum (2002:598–600) no longer consider government of case to be the defining feature of the class of prepositions, rather defining prepositions as words that can function as the heads of prepositional phrases. Verbs and verb phrases English verbs are inflected for tense and aspect, and marked for agreement with third person singular subject. Only the copula verb to be is still inflected for agreement with the plural and first and second person subjects.[166] Auxiliary verbs such as have and be are paired with verbs in the infinitive, past, or progressive forms. They form complex tenses, aspects, and moods. Auxiliary verbs differ from other verbs in that they can be followed by the negation, and in that they can occur as the first constituent in a question sentence.[175][176] Most verbs have six inflectional forms. The primary forms are a plain present, a third person singular present, and a preterite (past) form. The secondary forms are a plain form used for the infinitive, a gerund–participle and a past participle.[177] The copula verb to be is the only verb to retain some of its original conjugation, and takes different inflectional forms depending on the subject. The first person present tense form is am, the third person singular form is and the form are is used second person singular and all three plurals. The only verb past participle is been and its gerund-participle is being. English inflectional forms Inflection Strong Regular Plain present take love 3rd person sg. present takes loves Preterite took loved Plain (infinitive) take love Gerund–participle taking loving Past participle taken loved Tense, aspect and mood English has two primary tenses, past (preterit) and non-past. The preterit is inflected by using the preterit form of the verb, which for the regular verbs includes the suffix -ed, and for the strong verbs either the suffix -t or a change in the stem vowel. The non-past form is unmarked except in the third person singular, which takes the suffix -s.[175] Present Preterite First person I run I ran Second person You run You ran Third person John runs John ran English does not have a morphologised future tense.[178] Futurity of action is expressed periphrastically with one of the auxiliary verbs will or shall.[179] Many varieties also use a near future constructed with the phrasal verb be going to.[180] Future First person I will run Second person You will run Third person John will run Further aspectual distinctions are encoded by the use of auxiliary verbs, primarily have and be, which encode the contrast between a perfect and non-perfect past tense (I have run vs. I was running), and compound tenses such as preterite perfect (I had been running) and present perfect (I have been running).[181] For the expression of mood, English uses a number of modal auxiliaries, such as can, may, will, shall and the past tense forms could, might, would, should. There is also a subjunctive and an imperative mood, both based on the plain form of the verb (i.e. without the third person singular -s), and which is used in subordinate clauses (e.g. subjunctive: It is important that he run every day; imperative Run!).[179] An infinitive form, that uses the plain form of the verb and the preposition to, is used for verbal clauses that are syntactically subordinate to a finite verbal clause. Finite verbal clauses are those that are formed around a verb in the present or preterit form. In clauses with auxiliary verbs they are the finite verbs and the main verb is treated as a subordinate clause. For example, he has to go where only the auxiliary verb have is inflected for time and the main verb to go is in the infinitive, or in a complement clause such as I saw him leave, where the main verb is to see which is in a preterite form, and leave is in the infinitive. Phrasal verbs English also makes frequent use of constructions traditionally called phrasal verbs, verb phrases that are made up of a verb root and a preposition or particle which follows the verb. The phrase then functions as a single predicate. In terms of intonation the preposition is fused to the verb, but in writing it is written as a separate word. Examples of phrasal verbs are to get up, to ask out, to back up, to give up, to get together, to hang out, to put up with, etc. The phrasal verb frequently has a highly idiomatic meaning that is more specialised and restricted than what can be simply extrapolated from the combination of verb and preposition complement (e.g. lay off meaning terminate someone's employment).[182] In spite of the idiomatic meaning, some grammarians, including Huddleston & Pullum (2002):274, do not consider this type of construction to form a syntactic constituent and hence refrain from using the term "phrasal verb". Instead they consider the construction simply to be a verb with a prepositional phrase as its syntactic complement, i.e. he woke up in the morning and he ran up in the mountains are syntactically equivalent. Adverbs The function of adverbs is to modify the action or event described by the verb by providing additional information about the manner in which it occurs. Many adverbs are derived from adjectives with the suffix -ly, but not all, and many speakers tend to omit the suffix in the most commonly used adverbs. For example, in the phrase the woman walked quickly the adverb quickly derived from the adjective quick describes the woman's way of walking. Some commonly used adjectives have irregular adverbial forms, such as good which has the adverbial form well. Syntax In the English sentence The cat sat on the mat, the subject is the cat (a NP), the verb is sat, and on the mat is a prepositional phrase (composed of an NP the mat, and headed by the preposition on). The tree describes the structure of the sentence. Modern English syntax language is moderately analytic.[183] It has developed features such as modal verbs and word order as resources for conveying meaning. Auxiliary verbs mark constructions such as questions, negative polarity, the passive voice and progressive aspect. Basic constituent order English word order has moved from the Germanic verb-second (V2) word order to being almost exclusively subject–verb–object (SVO).[184] The combination of SVO order and use of auxiliary verbs often creates clusters of two or more verbs at the centre of the sentence, such as he had hoped to try to open it. In most sentences English only marks grammatical relations through word order.[185] The subject constituent precedes the verb and the object constituent follows it. The example below demonstrates how the grammatical roles of each constituent is marked only by the position relative to the verb: The dog bites the man S V O The man bites the dog S V O An exception is found in sentences where one of the constituents is a pronoun, in which case it is doubly marked, both by word order and by case inflection, where the subject pronoun precedes the verb and takes the subjective case form, and the object pronoun follows the verb and takes the objective case form. The example below demonstrates this double marking in a sentence where both object and subject is represented with a third person singular masculine pronoun: He hit him S V O Indirect objects (IO) of ditransitive verbs can be placed either as the first object in a double object construction (S V IO O), such as I gave Jane the book or in a prepositional phrase, such as I gave the book to Jane [186] Clause syntax Main article: English clause syntax In English a sentence may be composed of one or more clauses, that may in turn be composed of one or more phrases (e.g. Noun Phrases, Verb Phrases, and Prepositional Phrases). A clause is built around a verb, and includes its constituents, such as any NPs and PPs. Within a sentence one clause is always the main clause (or matrix clause) whereas other clauses are subordinate to it. Subordinate clauses may function as arguments of the verb in the main clause. For example, in the phrase I think (that) you are lying, the main clause is headed by the verb think, the subject is I, but the object of the phrase is the subordinate clause (that) you are lying. The subordinating conjunction that shows that the clause that follows is a subordinate clause, but it is often omitted.[187] Relative clauses are clauses that function as a modifier or specifier to some constituent in the main clause: For example, in the sentence I saw the letter that you received today, the relative clause that you received today specifies the meaning of the word letter, the object of the main clause. Relative clauses can be introduced by the pronouns who, whose, whom and which as well as by that (which can also be omitted.)[188] In contrast to many other Germanic languages there is no major differences between word order in main and subordinate clauses.[189] Auxiliary verb constructions Main articles: Do-support and Subject–auxiliary inversion English syntax relies on auxiliary verbs for many functions including the expression of tense, aspect and mood. Auxiliary verbs form main clauses, and the main verbs function as heads of a subordinate clause of the auxiliary verb. For example, in the sentence the dog did not find its bone, the clause find its bone is the complement of the negated verb did not. Subject–auxiliary inversion is used in many constructions, including focus, negation, and interrogative constructions. The verb do can be used as an auxiliary even in simple declarative sentences, where it usually serves to add emphasis, as in "I did shut the fridge." However, in the negated and inverted clauses referred to above, it is used because the rules of English syntax permit these constructions only when an auxiliary is present. Modern English does not allow the addition of the negating adverb not to an ordinary finite lexical verb, as in *I know not—it can only be added to an auxiliary (or copular) verb, hence if there is no other auxiliary present when negation is required, the auxiliary do is used, to produce a form like I do not (don't) know. The same applies in clauses requiring inversion, including most questions—inversion must involve the subject and an auxiliary verb, so it is not possible to say *Know you him?; grammatical rules require Do you know him?[190] Negation is done with the adverb not, which precedes the main verb and follows an auxiliary verb. A contracted form of not -n't can be used as an enclitic attaching to auxiliary verbs and to the copula verb to be. Just as with questions, many negative constructions require the negation to occur with do-support, thus in Modern English I don't know him is the correct answer to the question Do you know him?, but not *I know him not, although this construction may be found in older English.[191] Passive constructions also use auxiliary verbs. A passive construction rephrases an active construction in such a way that the object of the active phrase becomes the subject of the passive phrase, and the subject of the active phrase is either omitted or demoted to a role as an oblique argument introduced in a prepositional phrase. They are formed by using the past participle either with the auxiliary verb to be or to get, although not all varieties of English allow the use of passives with get. For example, putting the sentence she sees him into the passive becomes he is seen (by her), or he gets seen (by her).[192] Questions Both yes–no questions and wh-questions in English are mostly formed using subject–auxiliary inversion (Am I going tomorrow?, Where can we eat?), which may require do-support (Do you like her?, Where did he go?). In most cases, interrogative words (wh-words; e.g. what, who, where, when, why, how) appear in a fronted position. For example, in the question What did you see?, the word what appears as the first constituent despite being the grammatical object of the sentence. (When the wh-word is the subject or forms part of the subject, no inversion occurs: Who saw the cat?.) Prepositional phrases can also be fronted when they are the question's theme, e.g. To whose house did you go last night?. The personal interrogative pronoun who is the only interrogative pronoun to still show inflection for case, with the variant whom serving as the objective case form, although this form may be going out of use in many contexts.[193] Discourse level syntax At the discourse level English tends to use a topic-comment structure, where the known information (topic) precedes the new information (comment). Because of the strict SVO syntax, the topic of a sentence generally has to be the grammatical subject of the sentence. In cases where the topic is not the grammatical subject of the sentence, frequently the topic is promoted to subject position through syntactic means. One way of doing this is through a passive construction, the girl was stung by the bee. Another way is through a cleft sentence where the main clause is demoted to be a complement clause of a copula sentence with a dummy subject such as it or there, e.g. it was the girl that the bee stung, there was a girl who was stung by a bee.[194] Dummy subjects are also used in constructions where there is no grammatical subject such as with impersonal verbs (e.g., it is raining) or in existential clauses (there are many cars on the street). Through the use of these complex sentence constructions with informationally vacuous subjects, English is able to maintain both a topic comment sentence structure and a SVO syntax. Focus constructions emphasise a particular piece of new or salient information within a sentence, generally through allocating the main sentence level stress on the focal constituent. For example, the girl was stung by a bee (emphasising it was a bee and not for example a wasp that stung her), or The girl was stung by a bee (contrasting with another possibility, for example that it was the boy).[195] Topic and focus can also be established through syntactic dislocation, either preposing or postposing the item to be focused on relative to the main clause. For example, That girl over there, she was stung by a bee, emphasises the girl by preposition, but a similar effect could be achieved by postposition, she was stung by a bee, that girl over there, where reference to the girl is established as an "afterthought".[196] Cohesion between sentences is achieved through the use of deictic pronouns as anaphora (e.g. that is exactly what I mean where that refers to some fact known to both interlocutors, or then used to locate the time of a narrated event relative to the time of a previously narrated event).[197] Discourse markers such as oh, so or well, also signal the progression of ideas between sentences and help to create cohesion. Discourse markers are often the first constituents in sentences. Discourse markers are also used for stance taking in which speakers position themselves in a specific attitude towards what is being said, for example, no way is that true! (the idiomatic marker no way! expressing disbelief), or boy! I'm hungry (the marker boy expressing emphasis). While discourse markers are particularly characteristic of informal and spoken registers of English, they are also used in written and formal registers.[198] Vocabulary The vocabulary of English is vast, and counting exactly how many words English (or any language) has is impossible.[199][200][201] The Oxford Dictionaries suggest that there are at least a quarter of a million distinct English words.[199] Early studies of English vocabulary by lexicographers, the scholars who formally study vocabulary, compile dictionaries, or both, were impeded by a lack of comprehensive data on actual vocabulary in use from good-quality linguistic corpora,[202] collections of actual written texts and spoken passages. Many statements published before the end of the 20th century about the growth of English vocabulary over time, the dates of first use of various words in English, and the sources of English vocabulary will have to be corrected as new computerised analysis of linguistic corpus data becomes available.[201][203] Word formation processes English forms new words from existing words or roots in its vocabulary through a variety of processes. One of the most productive processes in English is conversion,[204] using a word with a different grammatical role, for example using a noun as a verb or a verb as a noun. Another productive word-formation process is nominal compounding,[201][203] producing compound words such as babysitter or ice cream or homesick.[204] A process more common in Old English than in Modern English, but still productive in Modern English, is the use of derivational suffixes (-hood, -ness, -ing, -ility) to derive new words from existing words (especially those of Germanic origin) or stems (especially for words of Latin or Greek origin). Formation of new words, called neologisms, based on Greek or Latin roots (for example television or optometry) is a highly productive process in English and in most modern European languages, so much so that it is often difficult to determine in which language a neologism originated. For this reason, lexicographer Philip Gove attributed many such words to the "international scientific vocabulary" (ISV) when compiling Webster's Third New International Dictionary (1961). Another active word-formation process in English is acronyms,[205] words formed by pronouncing as a single word abbreviations of longer phrases (e.g. NATO, laser). Word origins Main article: Lists of English loanwords by country or language of origin Source languages of English vocabulary[6][206] English, besides forming new words from existing words and their roots, also borrows words from other languages. This process of adding words from other languages is commonplace in many world languages, but English is characterised as being especially open to borrowing of foreign words throughout the last 1,000 years.[207] The most commonly used words in English are West Germanic.[208] The words in English learned first by children as they learn to speak, particularly the grammatical words that dominate the word count of both spoken and written texts, are the Germanic words inherited from the earliest periods of the development of Old English.[201] But one of the consequences of long language contact between French and English in all stages of their development is that the vocabulary of English has a very high percentage of "Latinate" words (derived from French, especially, and also from Latin or from other Romance languages).[209] French words from various periods of the development of French now make up one-third of the vocabulary of English.[210] English has also borrowed many words directly from Latin, the ancestor of the Romance languages, during all stages of its development.[203][201] Many of these words were earlier borrowed into Latin from Greek. Latin or Greek are still highly productive sources of stems used to form vocabulary of subjects learned in higher education such as the sciences, philosophy, and mathematics.[211] English continues to gain new loanwords and calques ("loan translations") from languages all over the world, and words from languages other than the ancestral Anglo-Saxon language make up about 60 percent of the vocabulary of English.[212] English has formal and informal speech registers, and informal registers, including child directed speech, tend to be made up predominantly of words of Anglo-Saxon origin, while the percentage of vocabulary that is of Latinate origin is higher in legal, scientific, and academic texts.[213][214] English loanwords and calques in other languages English has a strong influence on the vocabulary of other languages.[210][215] The influence of English comes from such factors as opinion leaders in other countries knowing the English language, the role of English as a world lingua franca, and the large number of books and films that are translated from English into other languages.[216] That pervasive use of English leads to a conclusion in many places that English is an especially suitable language for expressing new ideas or describing new technologies. Among varieties of English, it is especially American English that influences other languages.[217] Some languages, such as Chinese, write words borrowed from English mostly as calques, while others, such as Japanese, readily take in English loanwords written in sound-indicating script.[218] Dubbed films and television programmes are an especially fruitful source of English influence on languages in Europe.[218] Writing system See also: English alphabet, English braille, and English orthography Since the ninth century, English has been written in a Latin alphabet (also called Roman alphabet). Earlier Old English texts in Anglo-Saxon runes are only short inscriptions. The great majority of literary works in Old English that survive to today are written in the Roman alphabet.[30] The modern English alphabet contains 26 letters of the Latin script: a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, t, u, v, w, x, y, z (which also have capital forms: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W, X, Y, Z). The spelling system, or orthography, of English is multi-layered, with elements of French, Latin, and Greek spelling on top of the native Germanic system.[219] Further complications have arisen through sound changes with which the orthography has not kept pace.[42] Compared to European languages for which official organisations have promoted spelling reforms, English has spelling that is a less consistent indicator of pronunciation and standard spellings of words that are more difficult to guess from knowing how a word is pronounced.[220] There are also systematic spelling differences between British and American English. These situations have prompted proposals for spelling reform in English.[221] Although letters and speech sounds do not have a one-to-one correspondence in standard English spelling, spelling rules that take into account syllable structure, phonetic changes in derived words, and word accent are reliable for most English words.[222] Moreover, standard English spelling shows etymological relationships between related words that would be obscured by a closer correspondence between pronunciation and spelling, for example the words photograph, photography, and photographic,[222] or the words electricity and electrical. While few scholars agree with Chomsky and Halle (1968) that conventional English orthography is "near-optimal",[219] there is a rationale for current English spelling patterns.[223] The standard orthography of English is the most widely used writing system in the world.[224] Standard English spelling is based on a graphomorphemic segmentation of words into written clues of what meaningful units make up each word.[225] Readers of English can generally rely on the correspondence between spelling and pronunciation to be fairly regular for letters or digraphs used to spell consonant sounds. The letters b, d, f, h, j, k, l, m, n, p, r, s, t, v, w, y, z represent, respectively, the phonemes /b, d, f, h, d?, k, l, m, n, p, r, s, t, v, w, j, z/. The letters c and g normally represent /k/ and /?/, but there is also a soft c pronounced /s/, and a soft g pronounced /d?/. The differences in the pronunciations of the letters c and g are often signalled by the following letters in standard English spelling. Digraphs used to represent phonemes and phoneme sequences include ch for /t?/, sh for /?/, th for /?/ or /ð/, ng for /?/, qu for /kw/, and ph for /f/ in Greek-derived words. The single letter x is generally pronounced as /z/ in word-initial position and as /ks/ otherwise. There are exceptions to these generalisations, often the result of loanwords being spelled according to the spelling patterns of their languages of origin[222] or proposals by pedantic scholars in the early period of Modern English to mistakenly follow the spelling patterns of Latin for English words of Germanic origin.[226] For the vowel sounds of the English language, however, correspondences between spelling and pronunciation are more irregular. There are many more vowel phonemes in English than there are vowel letters (a, e, i, o, u, w, y). As a result of a smaller set of single letter symbols than the set of vowel phonemes, some "long vowels" are often indicated by combinations of letters (like the oa in boat, the ow in how, and the ay in stay), or the historically based silent e (as in note and cake).[223] The consequence of this complex orthographic history is that learning to read can be challenging in English. It can take longer for school pupils to become independently fluent readers of English than of many other languages, including Italian, Spanish, or German.[227] Nonetheless, there is an advantage for learners of English reading in learning the specific sound-symbol regularities that occur in the standard English spellings of commonly used words.[222] Such instruction greatly reduces the risk of children experiencing reading difficulties in English.[228][229] Making primary school teachers more aware of the primacy of morpheme representation in English may help learners learn more efficiently to read and write English.[230] English writing also includes a system of punctuation that is similar to the system of punctuation marks used in most alphabetic languages around the world. The purpose of punctuation is to mark meaningful grammatical relationships in sentences to aid readers in understanding a text and to indicate features important for reading a text aloud.[231] Dialects, accents, and varieties Main articles: List of dialects of the English language, World Englishes, and regional accents of English Dialectologists distinguish between English dialects, regional varieties that differ from each other in terms of grammar and vocabulary, and regional accents, distinguished by different patterns of pronunciation. The major native dialects of English are often divided by linguists into the two general categories of the British dialects (BrE) and those of North America (AmE).[232] There also exists a grouping of major native varieties of English in the southern hemisphere, the most prominent being Australian and New Zealand English. UK and Ireland See also: English language in England, Northern England English, Scots language, Scottish English, Welsh English, Estuary English, Ulster English, and Hiberno-English Map showing the main dialect regions in the UK and Ireland As the place where English first evolved, the British Isles, and particularly England, are home to the most variegated pattern of dialects. Within the United Kingdom, the Received Pronunciation (RP), an educated dialect of South East England, is traditionally used as the broadcast standard, and is considered the most prestigious of the British dialects. The spread of RP (also known as BBC English) through the media has caused many traditional dialects of rural England to recede, as youths adopt the traits of the prestige variety instead of traits from local dialects. At the time of the Survey of English Dialects, grammar and vocabulary differed across the country, but a process of lexical attrition has led most of this variation to disappear.[233] Nonetheless this attrition has mostly affected dialectal variation in grammar and vocabulary, and in fact only 3 percent of the English population actually speak RP, the remainder speaking regional accents and dialects with varying degrees of RP influence.[234] There is also variability within RP, particularly along class lines between Upper and Middle class RP speakers and between native RP speakers and speakers who adopt RP later in life.[235] Within Britain there is also considerable variation along lines of social class, and some traits though exceedingly common are considered "non-standard" and are associated with lower class speakers and identities. An example of this is H-dropping, which was historically a feature of lower class London English, particularly Cockney, but which today is the standard in all major English cities—yet it remains largely absent in broadcasting and among the upper crust of British society.[236] Speech example An example of an Essex male with a working-class Estuary accent (entertainer Russell Brand) Problems playing this file? See media help. English in England can be divided into four major dialect regions, Southwest English, South East English, Midlands English, and Northern English. Within each of these regions several local subdialects exist: Within the Northern region, there is a division between the Yorkshire dialects, and the Geordie dialect spoken in Northumbria around Newcastle, and the Lancashire dialects with local urban dialects in Liverpool (Scouse) and Manchester (Mancunian). Having been the centre of Danish occupation during the Viking Invasions, Northern English dialects, particularly the Yorkshire dialect, retain Norse features not found in other English varieties.[237] Since the 15th century, Southeastern varieties centred around London, which has been the centre from which dialectal innovations have spread to other dialects. In London, the Cockney dialect was traditionally used by the lower classes, and it was long a socially stigmatised variety. Today a large area of Southeastern England has adopted traits from Cockney, resulting in the so-called Estuary English which spread in areas south and East of London beginning in the 1980s. Estuary English is distinguished by traits such as the use of intrusive R (drawing is pronounced drawring /?dr??r??/), t-glottalisation (Potter is pronounced with a glottal stop as Po'er /po??/), and the pronunciation of th- as /f/ (thanks pronounced fanks) or /v/ (bother pronounced bover). [238] Speech example An example of a Scottish male with a middle-class Renfrewshire accent Problems playing this file? See media help. Scots is today considered a separate language from English, but it has its origins in early Northern Middle English[239] and developed and changed during its history with influence from other sources, particularly Scots Gaelic and Old Norse. Scots itself has a number of regional dialects. And in addition to Scots, Scottish English are the varieties of Standard English spoken in Scotland, most varieties are Northern English accents, with some influence from Scots.[240] In Ireland, various forms of English have been spoken since the Norman invasions of the 11th century. In County Wexford, in the area surrounding Dublin, two highly conservative dialects known as Forth and Bargy and Fingallian developed as offshoots from Early Middle English, and were spoken until the 19th century. Modern Hiberno-English however has its roots in English colonisation in the 17th century. Today Irish English is divided into Ulster English, a dialect with strong influence from Scots, and southern Hiberno-English. Like Scots and Northern English, the Irish accents preserve the rhoticity which has been lost in most dialects influenced by RP.[17][241] North America Main articles: American English, General American, African American Vernacular English, Southern American English, and Canadian English Rhoticity dominates in North American English. The Atlas of North American English found over 50% non-rhoticity, though, in at least one local white speaker in each U.S. metropolitan area designated here by a red dot. Non-rhotic African American Vernacular English pronunciations may be found among African Americans regardless of location. American English is fairly homogeneous compared to British English. Today, American accent variation is often increasing at the regional level and decreasing at the very local level,[242] though most Americans still speak within a phonological continuum of similar accents,[243] known collectively as General American (GA), with differences hardly noticed even among Americans themselves (such as Midland and Western American English).[244][245][246] In most American and Canadian English, rhoticity (or r-fulness) is dominant, with non-rhoticity (r-dropping) becoming associated with lower prestige and social class especially after World War II; this contrasts with the situation in England, where non-rhoticity has become the standard.[247] Separate from GA are American dialects with clearly distinct sound systems, historically including Southern American English, English of the coastal Northeast (famously including Eastern New England English and New York City English), and African American Vernacular English, all of which are historically non-rhotic. Canadian English, except for the Atlantic provinces and perhaps Quebec, may be classified under GA as well, but it often shows raising of certain vowels, /a?/ and /a?/, before voiceless consonants, as well as distinct norms for written and pronunciation standards.[248] In Southern American English, the largest American "accent group" outside of GA,[249] rhoticity now strongly prevails, replacing the region's historical non-rhotic prestige.[250][251][252] Southern accents are colloquially described as a "drawl" or "twang,"[253] being recognised most readily by the Southern Vowel Shift that begins with glide-deleting in the /a?/ vowel (e.g. pronouncing spy almost like spa), the "Southern breaking" of several front pure vowels into a gliding vowel or even two syllables (e.g. pronouncing the word "press" almost like "pray-us"),[254] the pin–pen merger, and other distinctive phonological, grammatical, and lexical features, many of which are actually recent developments of the 19th century or later.[255] Today spoken primarily by working- and middle-class African Americans, African American Vernacular English (AAVE) is also largely non-rhotic and likely originated among enslaved Africans and African Americans influenced primarily by the non-rhotic, non-standard English dialects of the Old South. A minority of linguists,[256] contrarily, propose that AAVE mostly traces back to African languages spoken by the slaves who had to develop a pidgin or Creole English to communicate with slaves of other ethnic and linguistic origins.[257] AAVE shares important commonalities with older Southern American English and so probably developed to a highly coherent and homogeneous variety in the 19th or early 20th century. AAVE is commonly stigmatised in North America as a form of "broken" or "uneducated" English, also common of modern Southern American English, but linguists today recognise both as fully developed varieties of English with their own norms shared by a large speech community.[258][259] Australia and New Zealand Main articles: Australian English and New Zealand English Since 1788, English has been spoken in Oceania, and Australian English has developed as a first language of the vast majority of the inhabitants of the Australian continent, its standard accent being General Australian. The English of neighbouring New Zealand has to a lesser degree become an influential standard variety of the language.[260] Australian and New Zealand English are most closely related to each other with few differentiating characteristics, followed by South African English and the English of southeastern England, all of which have similarly non-rhotic accents, aside from some accents in the South Island of New Zealand. Australian and New Zealand English stand out for their innovative vowels: many short vowels are fronted or raised, whereas many long vowels have diphthongised. Australian English also has a contrast between long and short vowels, not found in most other varieties. Australian English grammar aligns closely to British and American English; like American English, collective plural subjects take on a singular verb (as in the government is rather than are).[261][262] New Zealand English uses [?] for ?wh-? and its front vowels are often even higher than in Australian English.[263][264][265] Africa, the Caribbean, and South Asia See also: South African English, Caribbean English, and Indian English English is spoken widely in South Africa and is an official or co-official language in several countries. In South Africa, English has been spoken since 1820, co-existing with Afrikaans and various African languages such as the Khoe and Bantu languages. Today about 9 percent of the South African population speak South African English (SAE) as a first language. SAE is a non-rhotic variety, which tends to follow RP as a norm. It is alone among non-rhotic varieties in lacking intrusive r. There are different L2 varieties that differ based on the native language of the speakers.[266] Most phonological differences from RP are in the vowels.[267] Consonant differences include the tendency to pronounce /p, t, t??, k/ without aspiration (e.g. pin pronounced [p?n] rather than as [p??n] as in most other varieties), while r is often pronounced as a flap [?] instead of as the more common fricative.[268] Several varieties of English are also spoken in the Caribbean Islands that were colonial possessions of Britain, including Jamaica, and the Leeward and Windward Islands and Trinidad and Tobago, Barbados, the Cayman Islands, and Belize. Each of these areas are home both to a local variety of English and a local English based creole, combining English and African languages. The most prominent varieties are Jamaican English and Jamaican Creole. In Central America, English based creoles are spoken in on the Caribbean coasts of Nicaragua and Panama. [269] Locals are often fluent both in the local English variety and the local creole languages and code-switching between them is frequent, indeed another way to conceptualise the relationship between Creole and Standard varieties is to see a spectrum of social registers with the Creole forms serving as "basilect" and the more RP-like forms serving as the "acrolect", the most formal register.[270] Most Caribbean varieties are based on British English and consequently most are non-rhotic, except for formal styles of Jamaican English which are often rhotic. Jamaican English differs from RP in its vowel inventory, which has a distinction between long and short vowels rather than tense and lax vowels as in Standard English. The diphthongs /ei/ and /ou/ are monophthongs [e?] and [o?] or even the reverse diphthongs [ie] and [uo] (e.g. bay and boat pronounced [b?e?] and [b?o?t]). Often word final consonant clusters are simplified so that "child" is pronounced [t??ail] and "wind" [win].[271][272][273] As a historical legacy, Indian English tends to take RP as its ideal, and how well this ideal is realised in an individual's speech reflects class distinctions among Indian English speakers. Indian English accents are marked by the pronunciation of phonemes such as /t/ and /d/ (often pronounced with retroflex articulation as [?] and [?]) and the replacement of /?/ and /ð/ with dentals [t?] and [d?]. Sometimes Indian English speakers may also use spelling based pronunciations where the silent ?h? found in words such as ghost is pronounced as an Indian voiced aspirated stop [??].[274] References ^ OxfordLearner'sDictionary 2015, Entry: English – Pronunciation. ^ a b Crystal 2006, pp. 424–426. ^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin; Bank, Sebastian, eds. (2016). "Standard English". Glottolog 2.7. Jena: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History.  ^ Crystal 2003a, p. 6. ^ Wardhaugh 2010, p. 55. ^ a b Finkenstaedt, Thomas; Dieter Wolff (1973). Ordered profusion; studies in dictionaries and the English lexicon. C. Winter. ISBN 3-533-02253-6.  ^ a b Crystal 2003b, pp. 108–109. ^ a b Ethnologue 2010. ^ Crystal 2003b, p. 30. ^ "How English evolved into a global language". BBC. 20 December 2010. Retrieved 9 August 2015.  ^ The Routes of English 2015. ^ König 1994, p. 539. ^ Bammesberger 1992, pp. 29–30. ^ Bammesberger 1992, p. 30. ^ Robinson 1992. ^ Romaine 1982, pp. 56–65. ^ a b Barry 1982, pp. 86–87. ^ Durrell 2006. ^ König & van der Auwera 1994. ^ Harbert 2007. ^ Thomason & Kaufman 1988, pp. 264–265. ^ Watts 2011, Chapter 4. ^ Collingwood & Myres 1936. ^ Graddol, Leith & Swann et al. 2007. ^ Blench & Spriggs 1999. ^ Bosworth & Toller 1921. ^ Campbell 1959, p. 4. ^ Toon 1992, Chapter: Old English Dialects. ^ Donoghue 2008. ^ a b c Gneuss 2013, p. 23. ^ Denison & Hogg 2006, pp. 30–31. ^ Hogg 1992, Chapter 3. Phonology and Morphology. ^ Smith 2009. ^ Trask & Trask 2010. ^ a b Lass 2006, pp. 46–47. ^ Hogg 2006, pp. 360–361. ^ Thomason & Kaufman 1988, pp. 284–290. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 39. ^ Lass 1992. ^ Fischer & van der Wurff 2006, pp. 111–13. ^ Wycliffe, John. "Bible" (PDF). Wesley NNU.  ^ a b Lass 2000. ^ Görlach 1991, pp. 66–70. ^ Nevalainen & Tieken-Boon van Ostade 2006, pp. 274–79. ^ Cercignani 1981. ^ How English evolved into a global language 2010. ^ The Routes of English. ^ Romaine 2006, p. 586. ^ a b Mufwene 2006, p. 614. ^ a b Northrup 2013, pp. 81–86. ^ Baker, Colin (August 1998). "Encyclopedia of Bilingualism and Bilingual Education, page CCCXI". Multilingual Matters Ltd. Retrieved 9 August 2015.  ^ a b c Graddol 2006. ^ a b c Crystal 2003a. ^ a b McCrum, MacNeil & Cran 2003, pp. 9–10. ^ a b Romaine 1999, pp. 1–56. ^ Romaine 1999, p. 2. ^ Leech et al. 2009, pp. 18–19. ^ Mair & Leech 2006. ^ Mair 2006. ^ "Which countries are best at English as a second language?". World Economic Forum. Retrieved 29 November 2016.  ^ a b Crystal 2003a, p. 69. ^ "English". Ethnologue. Retrieved 2016-10-29.  ^ "Chinese, Mandarin". Ethnologue. Retrieved 2016-10-29.  ^ Crystal 2003b, p. 106. ^ a b Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 2. ^ a b Kachru 2006, p. 196. ^ a b Ryan 2013, Table 1. ^ Office for National Statistics 2013, Key Points. ^ National Records of Scotland 2013. ^ Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency 2012, Table KS207NI: Main Language. ^ Statistics Canada 2014. ^ Australian Bureau of Statistics 2013. ^ Statistics South Africa 2012, Table 2.5 Population by first language spoken and province (number). ^ Statistics New Zealand 2014. ^ a b c d Bao 2006, p. 377. ^ Rubino 2006. ^ Patrick 2006a. ^ Lim & Ansaldo 2006. ^ Connell 2006. ^ Schneider 2007. ^ a b Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 5. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 4. ^ European Commission 2012. ^ Kachru 2006, p. 197. ^ Kachru 2006, p. 198. ^ Bao 2006. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 7. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 2. ^ Romaine 1999. ^ Baugh & Cable 2002. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, pp. 8–9. ^ Ammon 2008, p. 1539. ^ Marsh, David (26 November 2010). "Lickety splits: two nations divided by a common language". The Guardian (UK). Retrieved 26 December 2015.  ^ Trudgill 2006. ^ Ammon 2008, pp. 1537–1539. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 122. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, pp. 5–6. ^ Deumert 2006, p. 130. ^ Deumert 2006, p. 131. ^ Crawford, James (1 February 2012). "Language Legislation in the U.S.A.". languagepolicy.net. Retrieved 29 May 2013.  ^ "States with Official English Laws". us-english.org. Retrieved 29 May 2013.  ^ Romaine 1999, p. 5. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, p. 1. ^ Kachru 2006, p. 195. ^ Mazrui & Mazrui 1998. ^ Mesthrie 2010, p. 594. ^ Annamalai 2006. ^ Sailaja 2009, pp. 2–9. ^ "Indiaspeak: English is our 2nd language – The Times of India". The Times of India. Retrieved 5 January 2016.  ^ "Human Development in India: Challenges for a Society in Transition" (PDF). Oxford University Press. 2005. Retrieved 5 January 2016.  ^ Crystal 2004b. ^ Graddol 2010. ^ Meierkord 2006, p. 165. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006, p. 690–91. ^ a b Northrup 2013. ^ Wojcik 2006, p. 139. ^ International Maritime Organization 2011. ^ International Civil Aviation Organization 2011. ^ Gordin 2015. ^ Phillipson 2004, p. 47. ^ ConradRubal-Lopez 1996, p. 261. ^ Richter 2012, p. 29. ^ United Nations 2008. ^ Ammon 2006, p. 321. ^ European Commission 2012, pp. 21, 19. ^ Alcaraz Ariza & Navarro 2006. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006, p. 694–95. ^ Crystal 2002. ^ Jambor 2007. ^ Svartvik & Leech 2006, Chapter 12: English into the Future. ^ Crystal 2006. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006. ^ Li 2003. ^ Meierkord 2006, p. 163. ^ Wolfram 2006, pp. 334–335. ^ Carr & Honeybone 2007. ^ Bermúdez-Otero & McMahon 2006. ^ MacMahon 2006. ^ International Phonetic Association 1999, pp. 41–42. ^ König 1994, p. 534. ^ Collins & Mees 2003, pp. 47–53. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 13. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2008, p. 41. ^ Brinton & Brinton 2010, pp. 56–59. ^ Collins & Mees 2003, pp. 46–50. ^ Brinton & Brinton 2010, p. 60. ^ König 1994, pp. 537–538. ^ International Phonetic Association 1999, p. 42. ^ Oxford Learner's Dictionary 2015, Entry "contract". ^ Merriam Webster 2015, Entry "contract". ^ Macquarie Dictionary 2015, Entry "contract". ^ Brinton & Brinton 2010, p. 66. ^ a b Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 4–6. ^ Roach 2009, p. 53. ^ Giegerich 1992, p. 36. ^ Lass 2000, p. 114. ^ Wells 1982, pp. xviii-xix. ^ Wells 1982, p. 493. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 22. ^ Aarts & Haegeman (2006), p. 118. ^ Payne & Huddleston 2002. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 56–57. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 55. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 54–5. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 57. ^ a b König 1994, p. 540. ^ Mair 2006, pp. 148–49. ^ Leech 2006, p. 69. ^ O'Dwyer 2006. ^ Greenbaum & Nelson 2002. ^ Sweet 2014, p. 52. ^ Jespersen 2007. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 425–26. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 426. ^ a b Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 51. ^ König 1994, p. 541. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 50. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 208–210. ^ a b Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 51–52. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 210–11. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 50–51. ^ Dixon 1982. ^ McArthur 1992, pp. 64, 610–611. ^ König 1994, p. 553. ^ König 1994, p. 550. ^ König 1994, p. 551. ^ Miller 2002, pp. 60–69. ^ König 1994, p. 545. ^ König 1994, p. 557. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 114. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 786–790. ^ Miller 2002, pp. 26–27. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 7-8. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, pp. 1365–70. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 1370. ^ Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 1366. ^ Halliday & Hasan 1976. ^ Schiffrin 1988. ^ a b HowManyWords 2015. ^ Sheidlower 2006. ^ a b c d e Algeo 1999. ^ Leech et al. 2009, pp. 24–50. ^ a b c Kastovsky 2006. ^ a b Crystal 2003b, p. 129. ^ Crystal 2003b, pp. 120–121. ^ "Joseph M. Willams, Origins of the English Language at". Amazon.com. Retrieved 2010-04-21.  ^ Denning, Kessler & Leben 2007, p. 7. ^ Nation 2001, p. 265. ^ Denning, Kessler & Leben 2007. ^ a b Gottlieb 2006, p. 196. ^ Romaine 1999, p. 4. ^ Fasold & Connor-Linton 2014, p. 302. ^ Crystal 2003b, pp. 124–127. ^ Algeo 1999, pp. 80–81. ^ Brutt-Griffler 2006, p. 692. ^ Gottlieb 2006, p. 197. ^ Gottlieb 2006, p. 198. ^ a b Gottlieb 2006, p. 202. ^ a b Swan 2006, p. 149. ^ Mountford 2006. ^ Neijt 2006. ^ a b c d Daniels & Bright 1996, p. 653. ^ a b Abercrombie & Daniels 2006. ^ Mountford 2006, p. 156. ^ Mountford 2006, pp. 157–158. ^ Daniels & Bright 1996, p. 654. ^ Dehaene 2009. ^ McGuinness 1997. ^ Shaywitz 2003. ^ Mountford 2006, pp. 159. ^ Lawler 2006, p. 290. ^ Crystal 2003b, p. 107. ^ Trudgill 2000, p. 125. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 3. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 37. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 40. ^ Hughes & Trudgill 1996, p. 31. ^ Trudgill 2000, pp. 80–81. ^ Aitken & McArthur 1979, p. 81. ^ Romaine 1982. ^ Hickey 2007. ^ Labov 2012. ^ Wells 1982, p. 34. ^ Rowicka 2006. ^ Toon 1982. ^ Cassidy 1982. ^ Labov 1972. ^ Boberg 2010. ^ "Do You Speak American: What Lies Ahead". PBS. Retrieved 15 August 2007.  ^ Thomas, Erik R. (2003), "Rural White Southern Accents" (PDF), Atlas of North American English (online), Mouton de Gruyter, p. 16. [Later published as a chapter in: Bernd Kortmann and Edgar W. Schneider (eds) (2004). A Handbook of Varieties of English: A Multimedia Reference Tool. New York: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 300-324.]  ^ Levine & Crockett 1966. ^ Schönweitz 2001. ^ Montgomery 1993. ^ Thomas 2008, p. 95–96. ^ Bailey 1997. ^ McWhorter, John H. (2001). Word on the Street: Debunking the Myth of a "Pure" Standard English. Basic Books. p. 162.  ^ Bailey 2001. ^ Green 2002. ^ Patrick 2006b. ^ Eagleson 1982. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 16–21. ^ Burridge 2010. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 24–26. ^ Maclagan 2010. ^ Gordon, Campbell & Hay et al. 2004. ^ Lanham 1982. ^ Lass 2002. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 30–31. ^ Lawton 1982. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, p. 115. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 117–18. ^ Lawton 1982, p. 256–60. ^ Trudgill & Hannah 2002, pp. 115–16. ^ Sailaja 2009, pp. 19–24. Bibliography Aarts, Bas; Haegeman, Liliane (2006). "6. English Word classes and Phrases". In Aarts, Bas; McMahon, April. The Handbook of English Linguistics. Blackwell Publishing Ltd.  Abercrombie, D.; Daniels, Peter T. (2006). "Spelling Reform Proposals: English". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04878-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Aitken, A. J.; McArthur, Tom, eds. (1979). Languages of Scotland. Occasional paper – Association for Scottish Literary Studies; no. 4. Edinburgh: Chambers. ISBN 978-0-550-20261-1.  Alcaraz Ariza, M. Á.; Navarro, F. (2006). "Medicine: Use of English". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 752–759. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/02351-8. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Algeo, John (1999). "Chapter 2:Vocabulary". In Romaine, Suzanne. Cambridge History of the English Language. IV: 1776–1997. Cambridge University Press. pp. 57–91. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521264778.003. ISBN 978-0-521-26477-8.  Ammon, Ulrich (November 2006). "Language Conflicts in the European Union: On finding a politically acceptable and practicable solution for EU institutions that satisfies diverging interests". International Journal of Applied Linguistics. 16 (3): 319–338. doi:10.1111/j.1473-4192.2006.00121.x.  Ammon, Ulrich (2008). "Pluricentric and Divided Languages". In Ammon, Ulrich N.; Dittmar, Norbert; Mattheier, Klaus J.; et al. Sociolinguistics: An International Handbook of the Science of Language and Society / Soziolinguistik Ein internationales Handbuch zur Wissenschaft vov Sprache and Gesellschaft. Handbooks of Linguistics and Communication Science / Handbücher zur Sprach- und Kommunikationswissenschaft 3/2. 2 (2nd completely revised and extended ed.). de Gruyter. ISBN 978-3-11-019425-8. Retrieved 19 December 2014 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Annamalai, E. (2006). "India: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 610–613. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04611-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Australian Bureau of Statistics (28 March 2013). "2011 Census QuickStats: Australia". Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Bailey, Guy (2001). "Chapter 3: The relationship between African American and White Vernaculars". In Lanehart, Sonja L. Sociocultural and historical contexts of African American English. Varieties of English around the World. John Benjamins. pp. 53–84. ISBN 978-1-58811-046-6.  Bailey, G. (1997). "When did southern American English begin". In Edgar W. Schneider. Englishes around the world. pp. 255–275.  Bammesberger, Alfred (1992). "Chapter 2: The Place of English in Germanic and Indo-European". In Hogg, Richard M. The Cambridge History of the English Language. 1: The Beginnings to 1066. Cambridge University Press. pp. 26–66. ISBN 978-0-521-26474-7.  Bao, Z. (2006). "Variation in Nonnative Varieties of English". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 377–380. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04257-7. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Barry, Michael V. (1982). "English in Ireland". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 84–134. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Bauer, Laurie; Huddleston, Rodney (15 April 2002). "Chapter 19: Lexical Word-Formation". In Huddleston, Rodney; Pullum, Geoffrey K. The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 1621–1721. ISBN 978-0-521-43146-0. Retrieved 10 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (10 February 2015).  Baugh, Albert C.; Cable, Thomas (2002). A History of the English Language (5th ed.). Longman. ISBN 978-0-13-015166-7.  Bermúdez-Otero, Ricardo; McMahon, April (2006). "Chapter 17: English phonology and morphology". In Bas Aarts; April McMahon. The Handbook of English Linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 382–410. doi:10.1111/b.9781405113823.2006.00018.x. ISBN 978-1-4051-6425-2. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  Blench, R.; Spriggs, Matthew (1999). Archaeology and Language: Correlating Archaeological and Linguistic Hypotheses. Routledge. pp. 285–286. ISBN 978-0-415-11761-6.  Boberg, Charles (2010). The English language in Canada: Status, history and comparative analysis. Studies in English Language. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-139-49144-0. Lay summary (2 April 2015).  Bosworth, Joseph; Toller, T. Northcote (1921). "Engla land". An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary (Online). Charles University. Retrieved 6 March 2015.  Brinton, Laurel J.; Brinton, Donna M. (2010). The linguistic structure of modern English. John Benjamins. ISBN 978-902728824-0. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  Brutt-Griffler, J. (2006). "Languages of Wider Communication". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 690–697. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00644-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Burridge, Kate (2010). "Chapter 7: English in Australia". In Kirkpatrick, Andy. The Routledge handbook of world Englishes. Routledge. pp. 132–151. ISBN 978-0-415-62264-6. Lay summary (29 March 2015).  Campbell, Alistair (1959). Old English Grammar. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-811943-7.  Carr, Philip; Honeybone, Patrick (2007). "English phonology and linguistic theory: an introduction to issues, and to 'Issues in English Phonology'". Language Sciences. 29 (2): 117–153. doi:10.1016/j.langsci.2006.12.018. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Cassidy, Frederic G. (1982). "Geographical Variation of English in the United States". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 177–210. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Cercignani, Fausto (1981). Shakespeare's works and Elizabethan pronunciation. Clarendon Press. Retrieved 14 March 2015. Lay summary (15 March 2015).  Collingwood, Robin George; Myres, J. N. L. (1936). "Chapter XX. The Sources for the period: Angles, Saxons, and Jutes on the Continent". Roman Britain and the English Settlements. Book V: The English Settlements. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press. LCCN 37002621. Lay summary (15 March 2015).  Collins, Beverley; Mees, Inger M. (2003) [First published 1981]. The Phonetics of English and Dutch (PDF) (5th ed.). Leiden: Brill Publishers. ISBN 9004103406.  Connell, B. A. (2006). "Nigeria: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 88–90. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01655-2. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 25 March 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Conrad, Andrew W.; Rubal-Lopez, Alma (1 January 1996). Post-Imperial English: Status Change in Former British and American Colonies, 1940–1990. de Gruyter. p. 261. ISBN 978-3-11-087218-7. Retrieved 2 April 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Crystal, David (2002). Language Death. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139106856. ISBN 978-1-139-10685-6. Retrieved 25 February 2015.  Crystal, David (2003a). English as a Global Language (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 69. ISBN 978-0-521-53032-3. Retrieved 4 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) – Library of Congress (sample) (4 February 2015).  Crystal, David (2003b). The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-53033-4. Retrieved 4 February 2015. Lay summary (4 February 2015).  Crystal, David (2004). "Subcontinent Raises Its Voice". The Guardian. Retrieved 4 February 2015.  Crystal, David (2006). "Chapter 9: English worldwide". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 420–439. ISBN 978-0-511-16893-2.  Daniels, Peter T.; Bright, William, eds. (6 June 1996). The World's Writing Systems. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-507993-7. Retrieved 23 February 2015. Lay summary (23 February 2015).  Dehaene, Stanislas (2009). Reading in the Brain: The Science and Evolution of a Human Invention. Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-02110-9. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Lay summary (3 April 2015).  Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. (2006). "Overview". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 30–31. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Denning, Keith; Kessler, Brett; Leben, William Ronald (17 February 2007). English Vocabulary Elements. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-516803-7. Retrieved 25 February 2015. Lay summary (25 February 2015).  Department for Communities and Local Government (United Kingdom) (27 February 2007). Second Report submitted by the United Kingdom pursuant to article 25, paragraph 1 of the framework convention for the protection of national minorities (PDF) (Report). Council of Europe. ACFC/SR/II(2007)003 rev1. Retrieved 6 March 2015.  Deumert, A. (2006). "Migration and Language". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 129–133. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01294-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Dixon, R. M. W. (1982). "The grammar of English phrasal verbs". Australian Journal of Linguistics. 2 (1): 1–42. doi:10.1080/07268608208599280.  Donoghue, D. (2008). Old English Literature: A Short Introduction. Wiley. doi:10.1002/9780470776025. ISBN 978-0-631-23486-9. Retrieved 16 March 2015.  Durrell, M. (2006). "Germanic Languages". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 53–55. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/02189-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Eagleson, Robert D. (1982). "English in Australia and New Zealand". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 415–438. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  "Summary by language size". Ethnologue: Languages of the World. Retrieved 10 February 2015.  European Commission (June 2012). Special Eurobarometer 386: Europeans and Their Languages (PDF) (Report). Eurobarometer Special Surveys. Retrieved 12 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (27 March 2015).  Fasold, Ralph W.; Connor-Linton, Jeffrey, eds. (2014). An Introduction to Language and Linguistics (Second ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-316-06185-5.  Fischer, Olga; van der Wurff, Wim (2006). "Chapter 3: Syntax". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 109–198. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Giegerich, Heinz J. (1992). English Phonology: An Introduction. Cambridge Textbooks in Linguistics. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-33603-1.  Gneuss, Helmut (2013). "Chapter 2: The Old English Language". In Godden, Malcolm; Lapidge, Michael. The Cambridge companion to Old English literature (Second ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 19–49. ISBN 978-0-521-15402-4.  Görlach, Manfred (1991). Introduction to Early Modern English. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-32529-3.  Gordin, Michael D. (4 February 2015). "Absolute English". Aeon. Retrieved 16 February 2015.  Gordon, Elizabeth; Campbell, Lyle; Hay, Jennifer; Maclagan, Margaret; Sudbury, Angela; Trudgill, Peter (2004). New Zealand English: its origins and evolution. Studies in English Language. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-10895-9.  Gottlieb, H. (2006). "Linguistic Influence". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 196–206. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04455-2. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Graddol, David (2006). English Next: Why global English may mean the end of 'English as a Foreign Language' (PDF). The British Council. Retrieved 7 February 2015. Lay summary – ELT Journal (7 February 2015).  Graddol, David (2010). English Next India: The future of English in India (PDF). The British Council. ISBN 978-0-86355-627-2. Retrieved 7 February 2015. Lay summary – ELT Journal (7 February 2015).  Graddol, David; Leith, Dick; Swann, Joan; Rhys, Martin; Gillen, Julia, eds. (2007). Changing English. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-37679-2. Retrieved 11 February 2015.  Green, Lisa J. (2002). African American English: a linguistic introduction. Cambridge University Press.  Greenbaum, S.; Nelson, G. (1 January 2002). An introduction to English grammar (Second ed.). Longman. ISBN 978-0-582-43741-8.  Halliday, M. A. K.; Hasan, Ruqaiya (1976). Cohesion in English. Pearson Education ltd.  Hancock, Ian F.; Angogo, Rachel (1982). "English in East Africa". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 415–438. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Harbert, Wayne (2007). The Germanic Languages. Cambridge Language Surveys. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511755071. ISBN 978-0-521-01511-0. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Lay summary – Language (journal of the Linguistic Society of America) (26 February 2015).  Hickey, R. (2007). Irish English: History and present-day forms. Cambridge University Press.  Hickey, R., ed. (2005). Legacies of colonial English: Studies in transported dialects. Cambridge University Press.  Hogg, Richard M. (1992). "Chapter 3: Phonology and Morphology". In Hogg, Richard M. The Cambridge History of the English Language. 1: The Beginnings to 1066. Cambridge University Press. pp. 67–168. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521264747. ISBN 978-0-521-26474-7.  Hogg, Richard M. (2006). "Chapter7: English in Britain". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 360–61. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  "How English evolved into a global language". BBC. 20 December 2010. Retrieved 9 August 2015.  "How many words are there in the English language?". Oxford Dictionaries Online. Oxford University Press. 2015. Retrieved 2 April 2015. How many words are there in the English language? There is no single sensible answer to this question. It's impossible to count the number of words in a language, because it's so hard to decide what actually counts as a word.  Huddleston, Rodney; Pullum, Geoffrey K. (15 April 2002). The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-43146-0. Retrieved 10 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (10 February 2015).  Hughes, Arthur; Trudgill, Peter (1996). English Accents and Dialects (3rd ed.). Arnold Publishers.  International Civil Aviation Organization (2011). "Personnel Licensing FAQ". International Civil Aviation Organization – Air Navigation Bureau. In which languages does a licence holder need to demonstrate proficiency?. Retrieved 16 December 2014. Controllers working on stations serving designated airports and routes used by international air services shall demonstrate language proficiency in English as well as in any other language(s) used by the station on the ground.  International Maritime Organization (2011). "IMO Standard Marine Communication Phrases". Retrieved 16 December 2014.  International Phonetic Association (1999). Handbook of the International Phonetic Association: A guide to the use of the International Phonetic Alphabet. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-65236-7.  Jambor, Paul Z. (December 2007). "English Language Imperialism: Points of View". Journal of English as an International Language. 2: 103–123.  Jespersen, Otto (2007) [1924]. "Case: The number of English cases". The Philosophy of Grammar. Routledge.  Kachru, B. (2006). "English: World Englishes". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 195–202. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00645-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Kastovsky, Dieter (2006). "Chapter 4: Vocabulary". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 199–270. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  König, Ekkehard; van der Auwera, Johan, eds. (1994). The Germanic Languages. Routledge Language Family Descriptions. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-28079-2. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Lay summary (26 February 2015).  The survey of the Germanic branch languages includes chapters by Winfred P. Lehmann, Ans van Kemenade, John Ole Askedal, Erik Andersson, Neil Jacobs, Silke Van Ness, and Suzanne Romaine. König, Ekkehard (1994). "17. English". In König, Ekkehard; van der Auwera, Johan. The Germanic Languages. Routledge Language Family Descriptions. Routledge. pp. 532–562. ISBN 978-0-415-28079-2. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Lay summary (26 February 2015).  Labov, W. (1972). "13. The Social Stratification of (R) in New York City Department Stores". Sociolinguistic patterns. University of Pennsylvania Press.  Labov, W. (2012). "1. About Language and Language Change". Dialect Diversity in America: The Politics of Language Change. University of Virginia Press.  Labov, William; Ash, Sharon; Boberg, Charles (2006). The Atlas of North American English. Berlin: de Gruyter. ISBN 3-11-016746-8. Retrieved 2 April 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Lanham, L. W. (1982). "English in South Africa". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 324–352. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Lass, Roger (1992). "2. Phonology and Morphology". In Blake, Norman. Cambridge History of the English Language. II: 1066–1476. Cambridge University Press. pp. 103–123.  Lass, Roger (2000). "Chapter 3: Phonology and Morphology". In Lass, Roger. The Cambridge History of the English Language, Volume III: 1476–1776. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 56–186.  Lass, Roger (2002), "South African English", in Mesthrie, Rajend, Language in South Africa, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-79105-2  Lass, Roger (2006). "Chapter 2: Phonology and Morphology". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. pp. 46–47. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Lawler, J. (2006). "Punctuation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 290–291. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04573-9. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Lawton, David L. (1982). "English in the Caribbean". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 251–280. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Leech, G. N. (2006). A glossary of English grammar. Edinburgh University Press.  Leech, Geoffrey; Hundt, Marianne; Mair, Christian; Smith, Nicholas (22 October 2009). Change in contemporary English: a grammatical study (PDF). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86722-1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 22 September 2016. Lay summary (PDF) (29 March 2015).  Levine, L.; Crockett, H. J. (1966). "Speech Variation in a Piedmont Community: Postvocalic r*". Sociological Inquiry. 36 (2): 204–226. doi:10.1111/j.1475-682x.1966.tb00625.x.  Li, David C. S. (2003). "Between English and Esperanto: what does it take to be a world language?". International Journal of the Sociology of Language. 2003 (164): 33–63. doi:10.1515/ijsl.2003.055. ISSN 0165-2516. Retrieved 27 March 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Lim, L.; Ansaldo, U. (2006). "Singapore: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of Language & Linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 387–389. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01701-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Maclagan, Margaret (2010). "Chapter 8: The English(es) of New Zealand". In Kirkpatrick, Andy. The Routledge handbook of world Englishes. Routledge. pp. 151–164. ISBN 978-0-203-84932-3. Lay summary (29 March 2015).  MacMahon, M. K. (2006). "16. English Phonetics". In Bas Aarts; April McMahon. The Handbook of English Linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 359–382.  "Macquarie Dictionary". Australia's National Dictionary & Thesaurus Online | Macquarie Dictionary. Macmillan Publishers Group Australia. 2015. Retrieved 15 February 2015. (registration required (help)).  Mair, C.; Leech, G. (2006). "14 Current Changes in English Syntax". The handbook of English linguistics.  Mair, Christian (2006). Twentieth-century English: History, variation and standardization. Cambridge University Press.  Mazrui, Ali A.; Mazrui, Alamin (3 August 1998). The Power of Babel: Language and Governance in the African Experience. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-51429-1. Retrieved 15 February 2015. Lay summary (15 February 2015).  McArthur, Tom, ed. (1992). The Oxford Companion to the English Language. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-214183-5. Lay summary (15 February 2015).  McCrum, Robert; MacNeil, Robert; Cran, William (2003). The Story of English (Third Revised ed.). London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-200231-5.  McGuinness, Diane (1997). Why Our Children Can't Read, and what We Can Do about it: A Scientific Revolution in Reading. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-83161-9. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Lay summary (3 April 2015).  Meierkord, C. (2006). "Lingua Francas as Second Languages". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 163–171. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00641-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) "English". Merriam-webster.com. 26 February 2015. Retrieved 26 February 2015.  Mesthrie, Rajend (2010). "New Englishes and the native speaker debate". Language Sciences. 32: 594–601. doi:10.1016/j.langsci.2010.08.002. ISSN 0388-0001. Retrieved 17 February 2015.  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Miller, Jim (2002). An Introduction to English Syntax. Edinburgh University Press.  Montgomery, M. (1993). "The Southern Accent—Alive and Well". Southern Cultures. 1 (1): 47–64.  Mountford, J. (2006). "English Spelling: Rationale". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 156–159. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05018-5. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Mufwene, S. S. (2006). "Language Spread". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 613–616. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01291-8. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Nation, I. S. P. (15 March 2001). Learning Vocabulary in Another Language. Cambridge University Press. p. 477. ISBN 0-521-80498-1. Retrieved 4 February 2015. Lay summary (PDF) (4 February 2015).  National Records of Scotland (26 September 2013). "Census 2011: Release 2A". Scotland's Census 2011. Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Neijt, A. (2006). "Spelling Reform". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 68–71. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04574-0. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Nevalainen, Terttu; Tieken-Boon van Ostade, Ingrid (2006). "Chapter 5: Standardization". In Denison, David; Hogg, Richard M. A History of the English language. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-71799-1.  Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency (11 December 2012). "Census 2011: Key Statistics for Northern Ireland December 2012" (PDF). Statistics Bulletin. Table KS207NI: Main Language. Retrieved 16 December 2014.  Northrup, David (20 March 2013). How English Became the Global Language. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-137-30306-6. Retrieved 25 March 2015. Lay summary (25 March 2015).  O'Dwyer, Bernard (2006). Modern English Structures, second edition: Form, Function, and Position. Broadview Press.  Office for National Statistics (4 March 2013). "Language in England and Wales, 2011". 2011 Census Analysis. Retrieved 16 December 2014.  "Oxford Learner's Dictionaries". Oxford. Retrieved 25 February 2015.  Patrick, P. L. (2006a). "Jamaica: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 88–90. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01760-0. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Patrick, P. L. (2006b). "English, African-American Vernacular". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 159–163. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05092-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Payne, John; Huddleston, Rodney (2002). "5. Nouns and noun phrases". In Huddleston, R.; Pullum, G. K. The Cambridge Grammar of English. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 323–522.  Phillipson, Robert (28 April 2004). English-Only Europe?: Challenging Language Policy. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-44349-9. Retrieved 15 February 2015.  Richter, Ingo (1 January 2012). "Introduction". In Richter, Dagmar; Richter, Ingo; Toivanen, Reeta; et al. Language Rights Revisited: The challenge of global migration and communication. BWV Verlag. ISBN 978-3-8305-2809-8. Retrieved 2 April 2015.  Roach, Peter (1991). English Phonetics and Phonology (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.  Roach, Peter (2009). English Phonetics and Phonology (4th ed.). Cambridge.  Robinson, Orrin (1992). Old English and Its Closest Relatives: A Survey of the Earliest Germanic Languages. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-2221-6. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Romaine, Suzanne (1982). "English in Scotland". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 56–83. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Romaine, Suzanne (1999). "Chapter 1: Introduction". In Romaine, Suzanne. Cambridge History of the English Language. IV: 1776–1997. Cambridge University Press. pp. 1–56. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521264778.002. ISBN 978-0-521-26477-8.  Romaine, S. (2006). "Language Policy in Multilingual Educational Contexts". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 584–596. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00646-5. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) "The Routes of English". 1 August 2015.  Rowicka, G. J. (2006). "Canada: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 194–195. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01848-4. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Rubino, C. (2006). "Philippines: Language Situation". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 323–326. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01736-3. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Ryan, Camille (August 2013). "Language Use in the United States: 2011" (PDF). American Community Survey Reports. p. 1. Retrieved 16 December 2014.  Sailaja, Pingali (2009). Indian English. Dialects of English. Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 978-0-7486-2595-6. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Schiffrin, Deborah (1988). Discourse Markers. Studies in Interactional Sociolinguistics. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-35718-0. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Schneider, Edgar (2007). Postcolonial English: Varieties Around the World. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-53901-2. Retrieved 5 April 2015. Lay summary (5 April 2015).  Schönweitz, Thomas (2001). "Gender and Postvocalic /r/ in the American South: A Detailed Socioregional Analysis". American Speech. 76 (3): 259–285. doi:10.1215/00031283-76-3-259.  Shaywitz, Sally E. (2003). Overcoming Dyslexia: A New and Complete Science-based Program for Reading Problems at Any Level. A.A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-375-40012-4. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Lay summary (3 April 2015).  Sheidlower, Jesse (10 April 2006). "How many words are there in English?". Retrieved 2 April 2015. The problem with trying to number the words in any language is that it's very hard to agree on the basics. For example, what is a word?  Smith, Jeremy J. (2 April 2009). Old English: a linguistic introduction. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86677-4.  Statistics Canada (22 August 2014). "Population by mother tongue and age groups (total), 2011 counts, for Canada, provinces and territories". Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Statistics New Zealand (April 2014). "2013 QuickStats About Culture and Identity" (PDF). p. 23. Retrieved 25 March 2015.  Lehohla, Pali, ed. (2012). "Population by first language spoken and province" (PDF). Census 2011: Census in Brief (PDF). Pretoria: Statistics South Africa. p. 23. ISBN 978-0-621-41388-5. Report No. 03?01?41. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 November 2015.  Svartvik, Jan; Leech, Geoffrey (12 December 2006). English – One Tongue, Many Voices. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-4039-1830-7. Retrieved 5 March 2015. Lay summary (16 March 2015).  Swan, M. (2006). "English in the Present Day (Since ca. 1900)". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 149–156. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05058-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Sweet, Henry (2014) [1892]. A New English Grammar. Cambridge University Press.  Thomas, Erik R. (2008). "Rural Southern white accents". In Edgar W. Schneider. Varieties of English. 2: The Americas and the Caribbean. de Gruyter. pp. 87–114. Retrieved 2 April 2015 – via De Gruyter. (subscription required (help)).  Thomason, Sarah G.; Kaufman, Terrence (1988). Language Contact, Creolization and Genetic Linguistics. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-91279-3.  Todd, Loreto (1982). "The English language in West Africa". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 281–305. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Toon, Thomas E. (1982). "Variation in Contemporary American English". In Bailey, Richard W.; Görlach, Manfred. English as a World Language. University of Michigan Press. pp. 210–250. ISBN 978-3-12-533872-2.  Toon, Thomas E. (1992). "Old English Dialects". In Hogg, Richard M. The Cambridge History of the English Language. 1: The Beginnings to 1066. Cambridge University Press. pp. 409–451. ISBN 978-0-521-26474-7.  Trask, Larry; Trask, Robert Lawrence (January 2010). Why Do Languages Change?. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83802-3. Retrieved 5 March 2015.  Trudgill, Peter (2000). The Dialects of England (2nd ed.). Oxford: Blackwell. ISBN 978-0-631-21815-9. Lay summary (27 March 2015).  Trudgill, P. (2006). "Accent". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. p. 14. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01506-6. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Trudgill, Peter; Hannah, Jean (2002). International English: A Guide to the Varieties of Standard English (4th ed.). London: Hodder Education. ISBN 0-340-80834-9.  Trudgill, Peter; Hannah, Jean (1 January 2008). International English: A Guide to the Varieties of Standard English (5th ed.). London: Arnold. ISBN 978-0-340-97161-1. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 26 March 2015. Lay summary (26 March 2015).  United Nations (2008). "Everything You Always Wanted to Know About the United Nations" (PDF). Retrieved 4 April 2015. The working languages at the UN Secretariat are English and French.  Wardhaugh, Ronald (2010). An Introduction to Sociolinguistics. Blackwell textbooks in Linguistics; 4 (Sixth ed.). Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4051-8668-1.  Watts, Richard J. (3 March 2011). Language Myths and the History of English. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195327601.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-532760-1. Retrieved 10 March 2015. Lay summary (10 March 2015).  Wells, J.C. (1982). Accents of English, I, II, III. Cambridge University Press.  Wojcik, R. H. (2006). "Controlled Languages". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 139–142. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/05081-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Wolfram, W. (2006). "Variation and Language: Overview". In Brown, Keith. Encyclopedia of Language & Linguistics. Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 333–341. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/04256-5. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Lay summary (6 February 2015).  – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) External links Find more aboutEnglish languageat Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Textbooks from Wikibooks Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Accents of English from Around the World (University of Edinburgh) Sound files comparing how 110 words are pronounced in 50 English accents from around the world Articles related to the English language Linguistics v t e Description of the English language Grammar Phonology Stress and reduced vowels Orthography Alphabet Braille Dialects Language history Phonological history v t e History of English Proto-Indo-European Proto-Germanic Proto-West-Germanic Anglo-Frisian languages Old English Anglo-Norman language Middle English Early Modern English Modern English Phonological history General Old English Vowels Great Vowel Shift low unrounded vowels low back vowels high back vowels high front vowels diphthongs changes before historic /l/ changes before historic /r/ trisyllabic laxing Northern Cities Vowel Shift Consonants rhoticity flapping t-glottalization l-vocalization consonant clusters h-dropping wh th th-fronting ð (eth) þ (thorn) th-stopping v t e Dialects and accents of Modern English by continent Europe United Kingdom England   Varieties by common name Barrovian Black Country Brummie Bristolian Cheshire Cockney "Mockney" Cornish Cumbrian East Anglian East Midlands Essex Estuary Geordie Kentish Lancastrian Mackem Mancunian Multicultural London Norfolk Northern Pitmatic Potteries Received Pronunciation Scouse Southern Suffolk Sussex West Country "Mummerset" West Midlands Yorkshire   Varieties by geographic location East of England Essex Norfolk Suffolk East Midlands North Cheshire Cumbria [Barrow] Lancashire Manchester Merseyside Sunderland Tyneside Yorkshire South Kent Thames Estuary; London [Multicultural London] Sussex West Country Bristol Cornwall Dorset West Midlands Black Country Birmingham Stoke-on-Trent Northern Ireland Mid Ulster Ulster Scots Scotland Glasgow Highlands Lowlands Wales Cardiff Gower Ireland Dublin D4 South-West Cork Supraregional Ulster Channel Islands Alderney Guernsey Jersey Elsewhere Gibraltar Isle of Man Malta North and South America United States   Varieties by common name African American Appalachian Boston Cajun California Chicago; Detroit; Great Lakes Chicano Mid-Atlantic Philadelphia; South Jersey Baltimorese General American High Tider Maine Miami Midland Midwestern New England New Mexican New York Northeast Pennsylvania Old Southern Ozark Pacific Northwest Pennsylvania Dutch Pittsburghese Rhode Island Southern Texan Upper Midwestern Western Vermont Yat Yeshivish Yooper   Varieties by geographic location Delaware Valley; Mid-Atlantic Pennsylvania Dutch Philadelphia; South Jersey Baltimore Midland Midwest Great Lakes; Inland North Upper Midwest Upper Peninsula of Michigan New England Boston Maine Rhode Island Vermont New York City; North Jersey New York Latino North Northeast Pennsylvania South Acadiana Appalachia Chesapeake; Pamlico Miami New Orleans Ozarks Texas West California New Mexico Pacific Northwest Western Pennsylvania Canada Aboriginal Atlantic Cape Breton Newfoundland Lunenburg Standard Ottawa Valley Pacific Northwest Quebec Caribbean Bahamas Barbados Dominican Republic Jamaica Puerto Rico Trinidad Elsewhere Bermuda Falkland Islands Guyana Oceania Australia Aboriginal Broad; Strine General South Australian Torres Strait West Australian Elsewhere Fiji New Zealand Palau Solomon Islands Other continents Africa Cameroon Ghana Kenya Liberia Malawi Namibia Nigeria Sierra Leone South Africa Afrikaans Black Cape Flats Indian White Uganda Asia Bangladesh Brunei Burma or Myanmar Hong Kong India Malaysia Nepal Pakistan Philippines Singapore Sri Lanka v t e Modern Germanic languages and dialects North Germanic West Scandinavian Bergensk Elfdalian Faroese Gøtudanskt Icelandic Jamtlandic Norwegian Bokmål Nynorsk Sognamål Trøndersk Valdris Vestlandsk Vikværsk East Scandinavian Bornholmsk Dalecarlian Danish Insular Danish Jutlandic South Perkerdansk Gutnish Kalix Kebabnorsk Kiruna Luleå Norrland Småländska South Swedish Scanian Stockholm Rinkeby Uppländska Västgötska Westrobothnian Swedish Åland Estonia Finland Ostrobothnia West Germanic Anglo- Frisian English English dialects North Frisian Saterland Frisian Scots West Frisian Low Franconian Dutch Hollandic West Flemish Zeelandic East Flemish Brabantian Limburgish Meuse-Rhenish Afrikaans Low German/ Low Saxon Dutch Low Saxon Northern Low Saxon Westphalian Eastphalian Mecklenburgisch-Vorpommersch Brandenburgisch East Pomeranian Central Pomeranian Low Prussian High German Standard German German Swiss Austrian Central German Ripuarian Moselle Franconian Luxembourgish Lorraine Franconian Rhine Franconian Hessian Thuringian Upper Saxon High Prussian Lausitzisch-neumärkisch Silesian Upper German East Franconian South Franconian Northern Bavarian Central Bavarian Southern Bavarian Swabian Low Alemannic Central Alemannic High Alemannic Highest Alemannic Swiss German Yiddish v t e Dictionaries of English Old and Middle English An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary Dictionary of Old English Middle English Dictionary Historic Catholicon Anglicum (1483) The English Schoole-Master (1596) The New World of English Words (1658) A New English Dictionary (1702) An Universal Etymological English Dictionary (1721) A Dictionary of the English Language (1755) Webster's Dictionary (1828) Worcester's Dictionary Richardson's New Dictionary Imperial Dictionary (1847–50) Century Dictionary (1889–91) American English American Heritage Dictionary of American English Dictionary of American Regional English Encarta New Oxford American Oxford American Random House Webster's Webster's New World Webster's Third New International Dictionary World Book Dictionary British English Chambers Collins Oxford English Concise Oxford English Compact Oxford English Shorter Oxford English Historical Thesaurus Oxford Dictionary of English Penguin Canadian English Canadian Oxford Dictionary of Canadianisms Gage Canadian (Full list) Australian English Australian National Australian Oxford Macquarie Online Wiktionary Collaborative International Dictionary of English OmegaWiki Urban Dictionary Wordnik Learners / ESL Cambridge Advanced Learner's Collins COBUILD Advanced Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners Merriam-Webster's Advanced Learner's Oxford Advanced Learner's Geopolitical use v t e English-speaking world Click on a coloured area to see an article about English in that country or region Further links Articles English-speaking world History of the English language British Empire English in the Commonwealth of Nations Lists List of countries by English-speaking population List of countries where English is an official language   Countries and territories where English is the national language or the native language of the majority Africa Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Americas Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda The Bahamas Barbados Belize Bermuda British Virgin Islands Canada Cayman Islands Dominica Falkland Islands Grenada Guyana Jamaica Montserrat Saba Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Trinidad and Tobago Turks and Caicos Islands United States United States Virgin Islands Europe Guernsey Ireland Isle of Man Jersey United Kingdom Oceania Australia New Zealand Norfolk Island Pitcairn Islands   Countries and territories where English is an official language, but not the majority first language Africa Botswana Cameroon The Gambia Ghana Kenya Lesotho Liberia Malawi Mauritius Namibia Nigeria Rwanda Sierra Leone Somaliland South Africa South Sudan Sudan Swaziland Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Americas Puerto Rico Asia Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Special Administrative Region India Pakistan Philippines Singapore Europe Gibraltar Malta Oceania American Samoa Cook Islands Fiji Guam Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru Niue Northern Mariana Islands Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tokelau Tuvalu Vanuatu Dependencies shown in italics. Authority control GND: 4014777-0 SUDOC: 027219232 NDL: 00561788 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=English_language&oldid=777197756" Categories: Analytic languages English language English languages Fusional languages Germanic languages Languages of American Samoa Languages of Antigua and Barbuda Languages of Australia Languages of Belize Languages of Bermuda Languages of Botswana Languages of Cameroon Languages of Canada Languages of Fiji Languages of Ghana Languages of Grenada Languages of Guam Languages of Guyana Languages of Hong Kong Languages of India Languages of Ireland Languages of Jamaica Languages of Kenya Languages of Kiribati Languages of Lesotho Languages of Liberia Languages of Malawi Languages of Malaysia Languages of Malta Languages of Mauritius Languages of Namibia Languages of Nauru Languages of New Zealand Languages of Nigeria Languages of Niue Languages of Pakistan Languages of Palau Languages of Papua New Guinea Languages of Rwanda Languages of Saint Kitts and Nevis Languages of Saint Lucia Languages of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Languages of Samoa Languages of Seychelles Languages of Sierra Leone Languages of Singapore Languages of South Africa Languages of South Sudan Languages of Sudan Languages of Swaziland Languages of the Bahamas Languages of the British Virgin Islands Languages of the Cayman Islands Languages of the Marshall Islands Languages of the Philippines Languages of the Pitcairn Islands Languages of the Solomon Islands Languages of the United Kingdom Languages of the United States Virgin Islands Languages of the United States Languages of Tokelau Languages of Trinidad and Tobago Languages of Uganda Languages of Vanuatu Languages of Zambia Languages of Zimbabwe Stress-timed languages Subject–verb–object languages Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Good articles Use dmy dates from February 2016 EngvarB from July 2014 Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code ISO language articles citing sources other than Ethnologue Articles including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Old English-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016 Articles with hAudio microformats Pages containing links to subscription-or-libraries content Pages containing links to subscription-only content Pages with login required references or sources Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiquote Languages Acèh ???????? ???????? Afrikaans Akan Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés ????? Armãneashti Arpetan ??????? Asturianu Avañe'? ???? Aymar aru Az?rbaycanca ?????? Bamanankan ????? Bahasa Banjar Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ??????? Bikol Central ????????? Boarisch ??????? Bosanski Brezhoneg ?????? Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski Eesti ???????? Emiliàn e rumagnòl ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara E?egbe ????? Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ?? ????? ??????? ?????? ?????? ?????? / Gõychi Konknni ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hawai?i ??????? ?????? Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue ??????/inuktitut ???? IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kalaallisut ????? Kapampangan ????????-??????? ??????? ????? / ????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Kinyarwanda Kiswahili ???? Kongo Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî ???????? ????? ???? Ladino ????? ????? ??? ???? ?????? Latga?u Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Ligure Limburgs Lingála La .lojban. Lumbaart Magyar ?????? ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ????????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Baso Minangkabau Mìng-d??ng-ng?? Mirandés ??????? ?????? ?????????? N?huatl Dorerin Naoero Nederlands Nedersaksies N?hiyaw?win / ??????? ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norfuk / Pitkern Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? Pälzisch Pangasinan ?????? Papiamentu ???? Patois ????? ???? ????????? Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Q?r?mtatarca Reo tahiti Ripoarisch Român? Rumantsch Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sámegiella Gagana Samoa ????????? Sängö Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sesotho Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana Shqip Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? SiSwati Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????????? / ?????????? ?l?nski Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Sranantongo ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Taqbaylit Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ?????? ??? ?????? ??? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe Twi ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? ???? ???????? / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Võro Walon ?? West-Vlams Winaray Wolof ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zazaki Zeêuws Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 25 April 2017, at 19:48. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Arts |||Portal:Arts From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Shortcuts: P:A P:ARTS Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Sociology portals: Arts · Anthropology · Community · Culture · Economics · Education · Geography · Gender studies · Globalization · History · Human rights · Internet · Law · Philosophy · Social movements · Social sciences · Social welfare and social work · Society edit   The Arts Portal Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts The arts is a vast subdivision of culture, composed of many creative endeavors and disciplines. It is a broader term than "art", which, as a description of a field, usually means only the visual arts. The arts encompass the visual arts, the literary arts and the performing arts – music, theatre, dance and film, among others. This list is by no means comprehensive, but only meant to introduce the concept of the arts. For all intents and purposes, the history of the arts begins with the history of art. The arts might have origins in early human evolutionary prehistory. Ancient Greek art saw the veneration of the animal form and the development of equivalent skills to show musculature, poise, beauty and anatomically correct proportions. Ancient Roman art depicted gods as idealized humans, shown with characteristic distinguishing features (e.g. Jupiter's thunderbolt). In Byzantine and Gothic art of the Middle Ages, the dominance of the church insisted on the expression of biblical and not material truths. Eastern art has generally worked in a style akin to Western medieval art, namely a concentration on surface patterning and local colour (meaning the plain colour of an object, such as basic red for a red robe, rather than the modulations of that colour brought about by light, shade and reflection). A characteristic of this style is that the local colour is often defined by an outline (a contemporary equivalent is the cartoon). This is evident in, for example, the art of India, Tibet and Japan. Religious Islamic art forbids iconography, and expresses religious ideas through geometry instead. The physical and rational certainties depicted by the 19th-century Enlightenment were shattered not only by new discoveries of relativity by Einstein and of unseen psychology by Freud, but also by unprecedented technological development. Paradoxically the expressions of new technologies were greatly influenced by the ancient tribal arts of Africa and Oceania, through the works of Paul Gauguin and the Post-Impressionists, Pablo Picasso and the Cubists, as well as the Futurists and others. More about The arts... View new selections below (purge) edit   Featured article Louis Lambert is a French novel by Honoré de Balzac (1799–1850), included in the Études philosophiques section of his novel sequence La Comédie humaine. Set mostly in a school at Vendôme, it examines the life and theories of a boy genius fascinated by the Swedish philosopher Emanuel Swedenborg (1688–1772). Balzac wrote Louis Lambert during the summer of 1832 while he was staying with friends at the Château de Saché. The novel contains a minimal plot, focusing mostly on the metaphysical ideas of its boy-genius protagonist and his only friend (eventually revealed to be Balzac himself). Although it is not a significant example of the realist style for which Balzac became famous, the novel provides insight into the author's own childhood. Specific details and events from the author's life – including punishment from teachers and social ostracism – suggest a fictionalized autobiography. Critics panned the novel, but Balzac believed that it provided an important look at philosophy, especially metaphysics. As he developed the scheme for La Comédie humaine, he placed Louis Lambert in the Études philosophiques section, and later returned to the same themes in his novel Séraphîta, about an androgynous angelic creature. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured picture Credit: Muhammad Mahdi Karim The glass house at Lal Bagh, a botanical garden in Bangalore, India. The garden was commissioned by the ruler of Mysore, Hyder Ali in 1760, and completed during the reign of his son Tipu Sultan. The glass house was modeled on London's Crystal Palace and constructed at the end of the 19th century. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Did you know... ... that The Fairman Rogers Four-in-Hand (pictured) was the first painting to demonstrate, based on systematic photographic analysis, how horses move? ... that Cheyenne artist Bently Spang satirized anthropologists' depictions of Native Americans as a "lost culture" with a museum exhibit showcasing ordinary objects? ... that Bagyi Aung Soe, now recognized as one of Burma's most important modern artists, lived in poverty and was considered by some to be mad? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   In this month 9 April 2000 – Jackie Evancho is born. At the age of 10, she becomes the youngest singer in history with a platinum album, O Holy Night. 10 April 1900 – Scottish soprano Mary Garden makes her professional debut singing the title role in Gustave Charpentier's Louise at the Opéra-Comique in Paris 11 April 1869 – Norwegian sculptor Gustav Vigeland, designer of the Nobel Peace Prize medal, is born near Halse og Harkmark 12 April 1937 – Abdülhak Hâmid Tarhan, an early 20th-century Turkish playwright and poet who was one of the leading lights of the Turkish Romantic period dies in Istanbul 23 April 1616 – William Shakespeare (pictured), often considered the greatest English playwright, dies in Stratford-upon-Avon at the age of 52 29 April 1968 – Hair, which defined the genre of the "rock musical", has its Broadway premiere at the Biltmore Theatre More anniversaries... edit   News April 5: Wikinews visits set of indie film 'Dead on Set' April 3: Pop-artist James Rosenquist dies aged 83 March 27: Fans unite at Toronto Comicon, meet Degrassi stars March 1: Politically concerned movie Zootopia wins Academy Award for Best Animated Feature Film February 15: Adele and David Bowie each win five Grammys Arts on Wikinews edit   Featured biography André Kertész (1894–1985) was a Hungarian-born photographer distinguished by his photographic composition and by his early efforts in developing the photo essay. In the early years of his lengthy career, his then-unorthodox camera angles, and his unwillingness to compromise his personal photographic style, prevented his work from gaining wider recognition. Even towards the end of his life, Kertész did not feel he had gained worldwide recognition. The first photographer to have an exposition devoted to his work, he is recognized as one of the seminal figures of photojournalism, if not photography as a whole. Dedicated by his family to work as a stock broker, Kertész was an autodidact and his early work was mostly published in magazines. The imminent threat of WWII pushed him to immigrate to the United States, where he had a more difficult life and needed to rebuild his reputation through commissioned work. He would take offense with several editors that he felt did not recognize his work. In the 1940s and '50s he stopped working for magazines and began to achieve greater international success. Despite the numerous awards he collected over the years, he still felt unrecognized, a sentiment which did not change even at the time of his death. His career is generally divided into four periods – the Hungarian period, the French period, the American period and, towards the end of his life, the International period. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured audio 1788 – Auld Lang Syne Frank C. Stanley's 1910 performance of Robert Burns' Auld Lang Syne. Contains the first and last verse. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories ? Arts ? Arts portal ? Arts by culture ? Arts by place ? Arts-related lists ? Aesthetics ? Arts genres by country or nationality ? Arts awards ? Censorship in the arts ? Crafts ? Creative works ? Arts districts ? Arts events ? Literature ? Arts occupations ? Arts organizations ? Arts portals ? Performing arts ? Religion and the arts ? Arts venues ? Visual arts ? Women and the arts ? Works about the arts ? Wikipedia books on arts ? Art stubs edit   WikiProjects Parent project Arts Descendant projects Aesthetics Architecture Books Novels Collections care Dance Films Horror Literature Magic Music Albums Classical music Composers Guitar Musicians Music Venues Opera Gilbert and Sullivan Richard Wagner Poetry Television Theatre Elizabethan theatre Musical theatre Visual arts Animation Anime and manga Contemporary art Comics Graffiti Graphic design Fashion Photography Public art What are WikiProjects? edit   Selected quote “ It [the movie art form] combines so many other art forms, as do theater and opera, but the essence of cinema is editing. It's the combination of what can be extraordinary images, images of people during emotional moments, or just images in a general sense, but put together in a kind of alchemy. A number of images put together a certain way become something quite above and beyond what any of them are individually. ” — Francis Ford Coppola ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Related portals Architecture Culture Dance Film Literature Music Philosophy Poetry Television Theatre Video games Visual arts Writing edit   Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Requests articles (arts and entertainment) Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Arts Expand: check Art stubs to expand Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Arts topics, requested pictures edit   Associated Wikimedia Arts on Wikibooks  Arts on Wikimedia Commons Arts on Wikinews  Arts on Wikiquote  Arts on Wikisource  Arts on Wikiversity  Arts on Wiktionary  Manuals and books Images and media News Quotations Texts Learning resources Definitions What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Arts&oldid=649230671" Categories: Arts portal Arts Visual arts Performing arts Arts portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Català ?eština Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español ????? Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kapampangan ??????? Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Malagasy ?????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? Nederlands ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ???? ????? ?????? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? ????? ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Svenska Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ?????? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? West-Vlams ?? Xitsonga ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 28 February 2015, at 14:19. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography |||Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology edit   The Biography Portal Cultural icon A biography is a detailed description or account of someone's life. More than a list of basic facts (education, work, relationships, and death), a biography also portrays a subject's experience of these events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of his or her life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of a subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Biographical works in diverse media—from literature to film—form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and, at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is about a life of a subject, written by that subject or sometimes with a collaborator. More about biographies… View new selections below (purge) edit   Featured biography Ahmose I (sometimes written Amosis I and meaning The Moon is Born) was a pharaoh of ancient Egypt and the founder of the Eighteenth dynasty. He was a member of the Theban royal house, the son of pharaoh Tao II Seqenenre and brother of the last pharaoh of the Seventeenth dynasty, King Kamose. Sometime during the reign of his father or grandfather, Thebes rebelled against the Hyksos, the rulers of Lower Egypt. When he was seven his father was killed, and when he was about ten his brother died of unknown causes, after reigning only three years. Ahmose I assumed the throne after the death of his brother, and upon coronation became known as Neb-Pehty-Re (The Lord of Strength is Re). During his reign he completed the conquest and expulsion of the Hyksos from the delta region, restored Theban rule over the whole of Egypt and successfully reasserted Egyptian power in its formerly subject territories of Nubia and Canaan. He then reorganized the administration of the country, reopened quarries, mines and trade routes and began massive construction projects of a type that had not been undertaken since the time of the Middle Kingdom. This building program culminated in the construction of the last pyramid built by native Egyptian rulers. Ahmose's reign laid the foundations for the New Kingdom, under which Egyptian power reached its peak. His reign is usually dated to about 1550–1525 BC. (Read more...) Archive – More "Featured biographies"... edit   Selected portrait Credit: Bain News Service, restored by jjron Lillian Diana Gish (October 14, 1893 – February 27, 1993) was an American stage, screen, and television actress, director and writer whose film acting career spanned 75 years, from 1912 to 1987. She was a prominent film star of the 1910s and 1920s, particularly associated with the films of director D. W. Griffith, including her leading role in Griffith's seminal Birth of a Nation. More selected pictures... Read more... edit   Things you can do Write an article Expand an article about: a person an actor an animator an artist a businessperson a diplomat an educator an engineer a jurist a military person a musician a politician a scientist a sportsperson a writer a photographer Improve an article by: adding references Review an article John Gilchrist (linguist) • Thomas Brattle • Answer requests for comments Assess an article Assessment requests Unassessed articles edit   Categories Biography • People By association • By behavior • By ethnicity • By gender • By language • By nationality By occupation: Academics • Scientists Actors • Artists • Choreographers • Comedians • Dancers • Directors • Musicians • Photographers • Playwrights • Writers Astronauts • Aviators • Explorers • Mountain climbers Businesspeople • Computer designers • Innovators Heads of state • Humanitarians • Journalists • Lawyers • Politicians • Warriors Sportspeople • Association football players • Baseball players • Basketball players • Olympians By place • By political orientation • By religion By status: Award winners • Billionaires • Celebrities By time • Lists of people ? Biography (genre) ? Biography awards ? Biographers ? Family history ? Biography journals ? Biographical museums ? Oral history ? Person databases ? The Biography Channel shows ? Biographical works edit   On this day – April 26 Births 121 - Marcus Aurelius, Roman Emperor (d. 180) 1711 - David Hume, Scottish philosopher and historian (d. 1776) (pictured) 1785 - John James Audubon, French-American naturalist and illustrator (d. 1851) 1917 - I.M. Pei, Chinese-born architect 1933 - Carol Burnett, American comedian Deaths 1865 - John Wilkes Booth, American actor and assassin (shot) (b. 1838) 1970 - Gypsy Rose Lee, American actress (b. 1911) 1989 - Lucille Ball, American actress and comedian (b. 1911) More of today's anniversaries... edit   Did you know ... that Madmen in the Yard, a drawing by the Croatian painter Ignjat Job (pictured), was influenced by his two-year stay in a mental hospital? ... that USMC Lieutenant General Henry Louis Larsen was Governor of American Samoa and Governor of Guam after his father-in-law and brother-in-law were each Governor of Colorado? ... that detailed drawings by French explorer Louis Delaporte guided the reconstruction of Pha That Luang, a major Buddhist temple in Laos? ... that although Norma Lyon studied animal science at Iowa State University, she ended up sculpting butter at state fairs? ... that Tom Paton, a member of the Montreal hockey club, was the first goaltender to win the Stanley Cup in 1893? ... that after the Ottoman general Turahano?lu Ömer Bey wiped out one of Dracula's armies in 1462, he deposited 2,000 severed heads at the feet of Sultan Mehmed II? ... that the hasty marriage of Thomas Thynne of Longleat may have helped to inspire Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet? Read more... edit   Quote of the week "There is no Death! What seems so is transition; This life of mortal breath Is but a suburb of the life elysian, Whose portal we call Death." — Henry Wadsworth Longfellow In Resignation, 1849 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit   WikiProjects List of WikiProjects and work groups that involve biography articles: Arts and entertainment Actors and Filmmakers Composers Canadian Dictionary of Biography Initiative Living persons Philosophers Saints Romance authors Military Peers and Baronets Politics and government U.S. Members of Congress U.S. presidents Royalty and nobility Science and academia Aerospace Sports and games Baseball players List of all WikiProjects See also: Biographies of living persons • Manual of Style (biographies) edit   Related portals Anthropology Community Criminal justice Culture Death Gangs Human rights LGBT Mind and brain Music Philosophy Religion Sexuality Social and political philosophy Thinking edit   Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Wikispecies  Species Wikipedia's Portals All Portals Overview Glossaries Indices Lists Outlines Categories Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Featured portals About portals Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=771163531" Categories: Depreciated Portal:Biography pages Biography portal Biography portals Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ?????? ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 19 March 2017, at 22:49. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Geography |||Portal:Geography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Sociology portals: Arts · Anthropology · Community · Culture · Economics · Education · Geography · Gender studies · Globalization · History · Human rights · Internet · Law · Philosophy · Social movements · Social sciences · Social welfare and social work · Society Places near you edit   The Geography Portal Transportation geography Geography is the science that studies the lands, the features, the inhabitants, and the phenomena of the Earth. A literal translation would be "to describe or write about the Earth". The first person to use the word "geography" was Eratosthenes (276–194 BC). Four historical traditions in geographical research are the spatial analysis of the natural and the human phenomena (geography as the study of distribution), the area studies (places and regions), the study of the human-land relationship, and research in the Earth sciences. Modern geography is an all-encompassing discipline that foremost seeks to understand the Earth and all of its human and natural complexities—not merely where objects are, but how they have changed and come to be. Geography has been called "the world discipline" and "the bridge between the human and the physical science". Geography is divided into two main branches: human geography and physical geography. More about geography… View new selections below (purge) edit   Featured article Karnataka is a state in South West India. It was created on 1 November 1956 with the passage of the States Reorganisation Act, and this day is annually celebrated as Karnataka Rajyotsava (Formation Day). Originally known as the State of Mysore, it was renamed Karnataka in 1973. It is the land of the Kannadiga, Tuluva, Konkani, and Kodava peoples. With over 61 million inhabitants as of 2011, Karnataka is the ninth largest state by population in India. Kannada is the most widely spoken and official language of the state. The two main river systems of the state are Krishna and its tributaries (Bhima, Ghataprabha, Vedavati, Malaprabha, and Tungabhadra) in the north, and the Cauvery and its tributaries (Hemavati, Shimsha, Arkavathi, Lakshmana Thirtha and Kabini) in the south. Both these rivers flow eastward and fall into the Bay of Bengal. With an antiquity that dates to the paleolithic, Karnataka has also been home to some of the most powerful empires of ancient and medieval India. The philosophers and musical bards patronised by these empires launched socio-religious and literary movements which have endured to the present day. Karnataka has contributed significantly to both the Carnatic and Hindustani forms of Indian classical music. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   In this month 7 April 1985 – Premiere of National Geographic Explorer on Nickelodeon 10 April 1982 – Arrival of Ranulph Fiennes and Charles R. Burton at North Pole 13 April 2005 – Launch of Genographic Project by National Geographic Society and IBM 27 April 1521 – Death of Ferdinand Magellan (pictured), Portuguese explorer who led part of the first expedition around the world More anniversaries... edit   Did you know... ...that the megalithic Niedertiefenbach tomb in Hesse (pictured), Germany has at least ten discernible layers of burials from the New Stone Age? ... that Broad Avenue in Memphis, Tennessee, went from vacant storefronts to a vibrant arts district in less than a decade? ... that forest degradation and illegal exports threaten the survival of the Rainforest Chameleon? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Things you can do Here are some tasks awaiting attention: Article requests?: See Requested articles/Social sciences/Geography, cities, regions and named places and Missing articles about Locations Assess?: Tag related article talk pages with {{WikiProject Geography}}. To help assess the quality and importance of geography articles, please see: Unassessed geography articles and Unknown-importance geography articles. Cleanup?: See Geography articles needing attention Geography Geographic information system Geography of China Geostatistics History of geography Holarctic Kriging Philosophy of geography Urbanism Valley Copyedit?: Geographical feature Glossary of geography terms List of world map changes Regions of North America (See Regions of Africa) Regions of Oceania Regions of South America Demographics of Asia (See Demographics of Africa) Demographics of Oceania Cycle of erosion Outer Continental Shelf Tied island Deletion sorting?: Listed at Geographic related deletion discussions Expand?: TOP PRIORITY: expand articles in Outline of geography and Outlines of regions (one for each country and region) - these are general reference companions to the main articles on each country. Are your favorite countries covered yet? The lists completed enough to be transferred to article space can be found at Portal:Contents/Geography and places. Index of geography articles (replace redirect with an article index, see Index of psychology articles as an example) List of geographers Visual geography Geographical coordinates?: See Articles missing geocoordinate data by country Infobox?: See Geography articles needing infoboxes Map?: See Wikipedia requested maps Notability?: See Geography articles with topics of unclear notability Photo?: See Wikipedia requested photographs of places Stubs?: See Geography stubs edit   Featured biography Mary Anning was a British fossil collector, dealer and palaeontologist who became known around the world for important finds she made in the Jurassic marine fossil beds at Lyme Regis where she lived. Her work contributed to fundamental changes in scientific thinking about prehistoric life and the history of the earth. Her discoveries included the first ichthyosaur skeleton to be correctly identified, found when she was just twelve years old; the first two plesiosaur skeletons ever found; the first pterosaur skeleton located outside Germany; and important fish fossils. Her observations were critical to the discovery that coprolites were fossilised faeces. Geologist Henry De la Beche's Duria Antiquior, the first widely circulated pictorial representation of a scene from prehistoric life derived from fossil reconstructions, was based largely on fossils Anning had found. Her gender and social class prevented her from fully participating in the scientific community of 19th-century Britain, prevented her from joining the Geological Society of London, and prevented her from getting full credit for her work during her lifetime. After her death her unusual life story attracted increasing interest. In 2010 the Royal Society included Anning in a list of the ten British women who have most influenced the history of science. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories ? Geography ? Geography by place ? Geography-related lists ? Geography awards and competitions ? Branches of geography ? Geographic classifications ? Geography conferences ? Geography education ? Environmental studies ? Exploration ? Geocodes ? Geographers ? Geographic data and information ? Geographical zones ? History of geography ? Land systems ? Landscape ? Lists of countries by geography ? Navigation ? Geography organizations ? Places ? Geographical regions ? Surveying ? Geographical technology ? Geography terminology ? Town squares ? Works about geography ? Geographic images ? Geography stubs edit   WikiProjects Parent project WikiProject Geography Descendant projects Caves Cities Countries Country subdivisions Demographics Deserts Former countries Geographical coordinates Glaciers Islands Lakes Maps Mountains Protected areas Rivers Subdivisions of former countries Tropical cyclones Urban studies and planning Volcanoes Waterfalls Related projects WikiProject Globalization What are WikiProjects? edit   Featured picture Credit: Ikiwaner Dead Acacia erioloba trees in Deadvlei, a white claypan inside Namib-Naukluft Park in the Namib Desert of Namibia. Deadvlei is surrounded by the highest sand dunes in the world, averaging 350 metres (1,150 ft) high. About 900 years ago, drought caused the dunes to block the Tsauchab river, which in turn killed the trees. However, because the desert is so dry, they do not decompose. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Selected quote “ Roll on, thou deep and dark blue Ocean—roll! / Ten thousand fleets sweep over thee in vain; / Man marks the earth with ruin—his control / Stops with the shore. ” — Lord Byron, Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, Canto IV (1818) ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Articles Antarctica Afro-Eurasia Americas Australia Africa Eurasia North America Oceania Europe Asia South America Supercontinents: Gondwana • Laurasia • Pangaea • Rodinia edit   Subportals Africa Antarctica Arctic Asia Caribbean Central America Europe European Union Islands Latin America Mediterranean Middle East North America Oceania Oceans South America edit   Related portals Atlas Atmosphere Atmospheric sciences Disasters Earth sciences Earthquakes Energy Environment Global warming Islands Mountains Physics Political science Science Seamounts Sociology Sustainable development Tropical cyclones Volcanoes Water Weather edit   Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Wikispecies  Species What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Geography&oldid=709404983" Categories: Geography Geography portals Geography portal Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Bosanski Català Cebuano ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Dansk Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk Gagauz ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? ????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? N?huatl Nederlands ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ???? ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? Scots Seeltersk Shqip ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ????? Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Vèneto Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 10 March 2016, at 18:53. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:History |||Portal:History From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology  History Ancient Egypt Ancient Germanic Culture Ancient Greece Ancient Japan Ancient Near East Ancient Rome Anglo-Saxon England Archaeology Austria-Hungary  British Empire Bulgarian Empire Byzantine Empire Classical civilisation Colonialism Crusades Dacia Disasters German Empire Heraldry History of Canada  History of science Imperial China Indian independence movement Khitan Latter Day Saint movement Middle Ages Mughal Empire New France Ottoman Empire Russian Empire Sasanian Empire Seljuk Empire Soviet Union  War edit   The History Portal This is the Place Monument History is the discovery, collection, organization, analysis, and presentation of information about past events. History can also mean a continuous, typically chronological record of important or public events or of a particular trend or institution. Scholars who write about history are called historians. It is a field of knowledge which uses a narrative to examine and analyse the sequence of events, and it sometimes attempts to objectively investigate the patterns of cause and effect that determine events. Historians debate the nature of history and its usefulness. This includes discussing the study of the discipline as an end in itself and as a way of providing "perspective" on the problems of the present. The stories common to a particular culture but not supported by external sources (such as the legends surrounding King Arthur) are usually classified as cultural heritage rather than as the "disinterested investigation" needed by the discipline of history. Events of the past prior to written record are considered prehistory. Amongst scholars, fifth century BC Greek historian Herodotus is considered to be the "father of history"; the methods of Herodotus along with his contemporary Thucydides form the foundations for the modern study of history. Their influence (along with other historical traditions in other parts of their world) has spawned many different interpretations of the nature of history which has developed over the centuries and are continuing to change. The modern study of history has many different fields, including those that focus on certain regions and those that focus on certain topical or thematic elements of historical investigation. Often, history is taught as part of primary and secondary education, and the academic study of history is a major discipline in university studies. More about History… View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article The formal unification of Germany into a politically and administratively integrated nation state officially occurred on 18 January 1871 at the Versailles Palace's Hall of Mirrors in France. Princes of the German states gathered there to proclaim Wilhelm of Prussia as Emperor Wilhelm of the German Empire after the French capitulation in the Franco-Prussian War. Unofficially, the transition of most of the German-speaking populations into a federated organization of states occurred over nearly a century of experimentation. Unification exposed several glaring religious, linguistic, social, and cultural differences between and among the inhabitants of the new nation, suggesting that 1871 only represents one moment in a continuum of the larger unification processes. The model of diplomatic spheres of influence resulting from the Congress of Vienna in 1814–15 after the Napoleonic Wars endorsed Austrian dominance in Central Europe. However, the negotiators at Vienna took no account of Prussia's growing strength within and among the German states, failing to foresee that Prussia would challenge Austria for leadership within the German states. This German dualism presented two solutions to the problem of unification: Kleindeutsche Lösung, the small Germany solution (Germany without Austria), or Großdeutsche Lösung, greater Germany solution (Germany with Austria). Reaction to Danish and French nationalism provided foci for expressions of German unity. Military successes—especially Prussian ones—in three regional wars generated enthusiasm and pride that politicians could harness to promote unification. This experience echoed the memory of mutual accomplishment in the Napoleonic Wars, particularly in the War of Liberation of 1813–14. By establishing a Germany without Austria, the political and administrative unification in 1871 at least temporarily solved the problem of dualism. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Selected biography Pericles (Greek: ????????, Perikl?s, "surrounded by glory"; c. 495 – 429 BC) was a prominent and influential statesman, orator, and general of Athens during the city's Golden Age—specifically, the time between the Persian and Peloponnesian wars. He was descended, through his mother, from the powerful and historically influential Alcmaeonid family. Pericles had such a profound influence on Athenian society that Thucydides, his contemporary historian, acclaimed him as "the first citizen of Athens". Pericles turned the Delian League into an Athenian empire and led his countrymen during the first two years of the Peloponnesian War. The period during which he led Athens, roughly from 461 to 429 BC, is sometimes known as the "Age of Pericles", though the period thus denoted can include times as early as the Persian Wars, or as late as the next century. Pericles promoted the arts and literature; this was a chief reason Athens holds the reputation of being the educational and cultural centre of the ancient Greek world. He started an ambitious project that generated most of the surviving structures on the Acropolis (including the Parthenon). This project beautified the city, exhibited its glory, and gave work to the people. Furthermore, Pericles fostered Athenian democracy to such an extent that critics call him a populist. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Did you know... ... that on 26 April 1881 HMS Doterel (pictured) exploded, killing 143 of the 155 crew members? ... that causes of the deaths at the Berlin Wall included shooting, drowning, suffocation, suicide, and falling from a balloon? ... that the 19th-century swindler Bertha Heyman, known as "The Confidence Queen," conned men by pretending to be a wealthy woman who was unable to access her fortune? ... that only four great uncial codices have survived until the present day? ... that after World War II, Polish resistance organizer and Warsaw Uprising fighter Jan Mazurkiewicz was brutally tortured by the authorities in communist Poland? ... that tiny Paederus beetles may have caused some of the ten Plagues of Egypt? ... that the only known report of bloodshed during the simulated Nazi invasion of Winnipeg was from a woman who cut her thumb while preparing toast? ... that Dacian bracelets were used as currency and votive offerings? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Selected picture The Trinity nuclear test was the first nuclear detonation in the world. Conducted by the United States Army on July 16, 1945, the successful test would set the stage for the coming Atomic Age. This image, captured by Berlyn Brixner, shows the fireball that developed 0.016 seconds after ignition; the explosive had a yield of 20 kilotons of dynamite. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   On this day April 26: World Intellectual Property Day; Feast day of Our Lady of Good Counsel (Roman Catholic Church) Statue of Sybil Ludington 1777 – American Revolutionary War: Sixteen-year-old Sybil Ludington (statue pictured) is claimed to have ridden forty miles through the night to warn militiamen under the control of her father that British troops were planning to invade Danbury, Connecticut. 1865 – U.S. Army soldiers cornered and fatally shot John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of US President Abraham Lincoln, in rural northern Virginia, ending a twelve-day manhunt. 1945 – World War II: Both the German and Polish–Soviet sides claimed victory as major fighting in the Battle of Bautzen ended. 1989 – An editorial was published in the People's Daily denouncing the growing unrest in Tiananmen Square, which would remain contentious through the remainder of the protests. 2007 – Controversy surrounding the relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn, a Soviet Red Army World War II memorial in Tallinn, Estonia, erupted into mass protests and riots. Alice Ayres (d. 1885) · I. M. Pei (b. 1917) · Morihei Ueshiba (d. 1969) More anniversaries: April 25 April 26 April 27 Archive By email List of historical anniversaries edit   Selected quote Victorious warriors win first and then go to war, while defeated warriors go to war first and then seek to win. —?Sun Tzu, Ancient Chinese military strategist ...Archive More... edit   Selected portal Classical civilisation "The ideas which now pass for brilliant innovations and advances are in fact mere revivals of ancient errors, and a further proof of the dictum that those who are ignorant of the past are condemned to repeat it." — Henry Hazlitt ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Things you can do    Here are some Open Tasks : Copy/edit: Hongwu Emperor, Indian independence movement, Modern history, More... Wikify: Merge: More... Requests: , More... Stubs: Panhellenic Liberation Movement, More... Requested pictures - of history topics Are you a historian, i.e. one who studies and writes history, and who has a keen interest in writing outstanding articles? Join our fine group by adding Category:Wikipedian historians to the bottom of your user page. edit   WikiProjects History Ancient Near East • Australian History • Classical Greece and Rome • Dacia • Former countries • History of Canada • Chinese history • European history • Heraldry and vexillology • Indian history • Jewish history • Medieval Scotland • Mesoamerica • Military history • Middle Ages • History of Science Time Days of the Year • Years Biography Composers • Political figures • Saints • United States Presidents   Topics v t e Social sciences Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural linguistics social Economics microeconomics macroeconomics Geography human integrative History cultural economic political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems Political science international relations psephology public administration public policy Psychology abnormal biological cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental (social science studies) Food studies Gender studies Global studies History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Media studies Philosophy of science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Social work Other categorizations Humanities Geisteswissenschaft Human science Index Journals Outline Wikiversity v t e Humanities Anthropology Digital Humanities History Law Literature Performing arts Politics Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts v t e Time Key concepts Human Life Nature Past history deep time Present Future Futures studies Far future in religion Far future in science fiction and popular culture Timeline of the far future Eternity Eternity of the world Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC UT TAI Unit of time Planck time Second Minute Hour Day Week Month Year Decade Century Millennium Tropical year Sidereal year Measurement systems Time zone 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Daylight saving time Solar time Sidereal time Metric time Decimal time Hexadecimal time Calendars Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Lunar Solar Hijri Mayan Intercalation Leap second Leap year Clocks Horology History of timekeeping devices Main types astrarium atomic quantum marine sundial sundial markup schema watch water-based Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Chronicle Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Religion Mythology Dreamtime K?la Kalachakra Prophecy Time and fate deities Wheel of time Immortality Philosophy of time A-series and B-series B-theory of time Causality Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Human experience and use of time Accounting period Chronemics Fiscal year Generation time Mental chronometry Music Procrastination Punctuality Temporal database Term Time discipline Time management Time perception Specious present Time-tracking software Time-use research Time-based currency (time banking) Time value of money Time clock Timesheet Yesterday Time in Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute time and space Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Imaginary time Planck epoch Planck time Proper time Rate Spacetime Theory of relativity Time dilation gravitational Time domain T-symmetry other subject areas Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Dating methodologies in archaeology Time geography Related topics Carpe diem Clock position Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time complexity Time signature Time travel Time portal v t e Chronology Key topics Archaeology Astronomy Geology History Human Life Nature Paleontology Time Eras Epochs Calendar eras Human Era Ab urbe condita Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Mundi Byzantine era Seleucid era Spanish era Before Present Hijri Egyptian Sothic cycle Hindu units of time (Yuga) Mesoamerican Long Count Short Count Tzolk'in Haab' Regnal year Canon of Kings Lists of kings Limmu Era names Chinese Japanese Korean Vietnamese Calendars Pre-Julian / Julian Pre-Julian Roman Original Julian Proleptic Julian Revised Julian Gregorian Gregorian Proleptic Gregorian Old Style and New Style dates Adoption of the Gregorian calendar Dual dating Astronomical Lunisolar Solar Lunar Astronomical year numbering Others Chinese sexagenary cycle Geologic Calendar Hebrew Iranian Islamic ISO week date Mesoamerican Maya Aztec Winter count (Plains Indians) Astronomic time Cosmic Calendar Ephemeris Galactic year Metonic cycle Milankovitch cycles Geologic time Concepts Deep time Geological history of Earth Geological time units Standards Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA) Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) Methods Chronostratigraphy Geochronology Isotope geochemistry Law of superposition Luminescence dating Samarium-neodymium dating Chronological dating Absolute dating Amino acid racemisation Archaeomagnetic dating Dendrochronology Ice core Incremental dating Lichenometry Paleomagnetism Radiometric dating Radiocarbon Uranium–lead Potassium-argon Tephrochronology Luminescence dating Relative dating Fluorine absorption Nitrogen dating Obsidian hydration Seriation Stratigraphy Genetic methods Molecular clock Linguistic methods Glottochronology Related topics Chronicle New Chronology Periodization Synchronoptic view Timeline Year Zero Circa Floruit Terminus post quem ASPRO chronology Portal edit   Categories History • By period • By region • By topic • By ethnic group • Historiography • Archaeology • Books • Documents • Maps • Images • Magazines • Organizations • Fictional • Museums • Pseudohistory • Stubs • Timelines • Chronology • People • Wikipedia historians ? History ? History by ethnic group ? History by location ? History by period ? History by topic ? Fields of history ? Historians ? History-related lists ? History awards ? Bible history ? Chronology ? Historical controversies ? Economic, social and political strategies ? History education ? Historical eras ? Events ? Historically themed events ? Historical geography ? Historicity ? Historiography ? Legacies ? Media history ? Historical objects ? Oral history ? History organizations ? Phaleristics ? Philosophy of history ? Historic preservation ? Pseudohistory ? Sacred history ? Theories of history ? Historical timelines ? Works about history ? World history ? Wikipedia books on history ? History images ? History stubs   Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Wikispecies  Species What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:History&oldid=749756545" Categories: History portal History portals History Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikisource Wikiversity Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ???? Ænglisc ??????? ?????? ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Euskara ????? Français Frysk Gagauz Galego G?k?y? ??? ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Basa Jawa Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? ?????? ????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? Nederlands ??? Napulitano ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ?????? ???? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? West-Vlams Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 16 November 2016, at 00:57. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Mathematics |||Portal:Mathematics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology edit   The Mathematics Portal Square root Mathematics is the study of numbers, quantity, space, structure, and change. Mathematics is used throughout the world as an essential tool in many fields, including natural science, engineering, medicine, and the social sciences. Applied mathematics, the branch of mathematics concerned with application of mathematical knowledge to other fields, inspires and makes use of new mathematical discoveries and sometimes leads to the development of entirely new mathematical disciplines, such as statistics and game theory. Mathematicians also engage in pure mathematics, or mathematics for its own sake, without having any application in mind. There is no clear line separating pure and applied mathematics, and practical applications for what began as pure mathematics are often discovered. More about Mathematics... Selected article | Selected picture | Did you know... | Topics in mathematics Categories | WikiProjects | Things you can do | Index | Related portals There are approximately 31,444 mathematics articles in Wikipedia. View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article Carl Friedrich Gauss Image credit: C.A. Jensen (1792-1870) Carl Friedrich Gauss (30 April 1777 – 23 February 1855) was a German mathematician and scientist of profound genius who contributed significantly to many fields, including number theory, analysis, differential geometry, geodesy, electricity, magnetism, astronomy and optics. Known as "the prince of mathematicians" and "greatest mathematician since antiquity", Gauss had a remarkable influence in many fields of mathematics and science and is ranked as one of history's most influential mathematicians. Gauss was a child prodigy, of whom there are many anecdotes pertaining to his astounding precocity while a mere toddler, and made his first ground-breaking mathematical discoveries while still a teenager. He completed Disquisitiones Arithmeticae, his magnum opus, at the age of twenty-one (1798), though it wasn't published until 1801. This work was fundamental in consolidating number theory as a discipline and has shaped the field to the present day. View all selected articles Read More... edit   Selected picture Credit: BenFrantzDale A Lorenz curve shows the distribution of income in a population by plotting the percentage y of total income that is earned by the bottom x percent of households (or individuals). Developed by economist Max O. Lorenz in 1905 to describe income inequality, the curve is typically plotted with a diagonal line (reflecting a hypothetical "equal" distribution of incomes) for comparison. This leads naturally to a derived quantity called the Gini coefficient, first published in 1912 by Corrado Gini, which is the ratio of the area between the diagonal line and the curve (area A in this graph) to the area under the diagonal line (the sum of A and B); higher Gini coefficients reflect more income inequality. Lorenz's curve is a special kind of cumulative distribution function used to characterize quantities that follow a Pareto distribution, a type of power law. More specifically, it can be used to illustrate the Pareto principle, a rule of thumb stating that roughly 80% of the identified "effects" in a given phenomenon under study will come from 20% of the "causes" (in the first decade of the 20th century Vilfredo Pareto showed that 80% of the land in Italy was owned by 20% of the population). As this so-called "80–20 rule" implies a specific level of inequality (i.e., a specific power law), more or less extreme cases are possible. For example, in the United States in the first half of the 2010s, 95% of the financial wealth was held by the top 20% of wealthiest households (in 2010), the top 1% of individuals held approximately 40% of the wealth (2012), and the top 1% of income earners received approximately 20% of the pre-tax income (2013). Observations such as these have brought income and wealth inequality into popular consciousness and have given rise to various slogans about "the 1%" versus "the 99%". More selected pictures... Read more... edit   Did you know... ... that economists blame market failures on non-convexity? ... that, according to the pizza theorem, a circular pizza that is sliced off-center into eight equal-angled wedges can still be divided equally between two people? ... that the clique problem of programming a computer to find complete subgraphs in an undirected graph was first studied as a way to find groups of people who all know each other in social networks? ... that the Herschel graph is the smallest possible polyhedral graph that does not have a Hamiltonian cycle? ... that the Life without Death cellular automaton, a mathematical model of pattern formation, is a variant of Conway's Game of Life in which cells, once brought to life, never die? ... that one can list every positive rational number without repetition by breadth-first traversal of the Calkin–Wilf tree? ... that the Hadwiger conjecture implies that the external surface of any three-dimensional convex body can be illuminated by only eight light sources, but the best proven bound is that 16 lights are sufficient?                           Showing 7 items out of 72 More did you know edit   WikiProjects The Mathematics WikiProject is the center for mathematics-related editing on Wikipedia. Join the discussion on the project's talk page. Project pages Participants Current activity Manual of style Conventions Essays Advice on using Wikipedia for mathematics self-study Proofs Subprojects PlanetMath Exchange (Talk) Graphics (Talk) Article assessment (Talk) Related projects Computer science | Cryptography | Game theory | Numbers | Physics | Science | Statistics edit   Things you can do Create a new article: See requested articles list Add a new image: Requested images list Improve articles: Pages needing attention (Category) Expand articles: Mathematics stubs edit   Categories Algebra | Arithmetic | Analysis | Complex analysis | Applied mathematics | Calculus | Category theory | Chaos theory | Combinatorics | Dynamic systems | Fractals | Game theory | Geometry | Algebraic geometry | Graph theory | Group theory | Linear algebra | Mathematical logic | Model theory | Multi-dimensional geometry | Number theory | Numerical analysis | Optimization | Order theory | Probability and statistics | Set theory | Statistics | Topology | Algebraic topology | Trigonometry | Linear programming Mathematics (books) | History of mathematics | Mathematicians | Awards | Education | Literature | Notation | Organizations | Theorems | Proofs | Unsolved problems ? Mathematics ? Fields of mathematics ? Mathematics-related lists ? Mathematicians ? Mathematical concepts ? Mathematics and culture ? Mathematical examples ? History of mathematics ? Mathematics and art ? Mathematical modeling ? Mathematical notation ? Mathematical science occupations ? Philosophy of mathematics ? Mathematical projects ? Mathematical proofs ? Pseudomathematics ? Set indices on mathematics ? Mathematical terminology ? Mathematics textbooks ? Mathematical theorems ? Mathematical tools ? Women in mathematics ? Wikipedia books on mathematics ? Mathematics stubs More mathematics categories edit   Topics in mathematics General Foundations Number theory Discrete mathematics Mathematicians History of mathematics Philosophy of mathematics Mathematical notation Mathematical beauty Mathematics education Areas of mathematics List of basic mathematics topics List of mathematical symbols Wikipedia Books: Mathematics Foundations of mathematics Mathematical logic Proof theory Gödel's incompleteness theorems Model theory Recursion theory Set theory (portal) Naive set theory Axiomatic set theory Category theory (portal) Topos theory Number theory (portal) Algebraic number theory Analytic number theory Arithmetic Fundamental theorem of arithmetic Numbers Natural numbers Prime numbers Rational numbers Algebraic numbers Discrete mathematics (portal) Combinatorics Combinatorial geometry Coding theory Combinatorial design Enumerative combinatorics Combinatorial optimization Graph theory Order theory Lattice theory Algebra Analysis Geometry and topology Applied mathematics Algebra (portal) Elementary algebra Abstract algebra Group theory Ring theory Field theory Commutative algebra Geometric algebra Linear algebra Matrix theory Multilinear algebra Universal algebra Fundamental theorem of algebra Analysis (portal) Calculus Fundamental theorem of calculus Vector calculus Geometric calculus Measure theory Real analysis Complex analysis Differential equations Ordinary differential equations Partial differential equations Integral equations Approximation theory Special functions Potential theory Harmonic analysis Fourier analysis Functional analysis Operator theory Geometry (portal) Euclidean geometry Trigonometry Analytic geometry Non-Euclidean geometry Affine geometry Projective geometry Convex geometry Discrete geometry Algebraic geometry Differential geometry Riemannian geometry Lie groups Topology (portal) General topology Algebraic topology Geometric topology Differential topology Applied mathematics Mathematical modeling Mathematical physics Dynamical systems Control theory Calculus of variations Optimization Mathematical economics Game theory Mathematical finance Statistics (portal) Probability theory Stochastic processes Numerical analysis Theoretical computer science Computability theory Complexity theory Cryptography (portal) Information theory edit   Index of mathematics articles ARTICLE INDEX: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z (0–9) MATHEMATICIANS: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z edit   Related portals Algebra Analysis Category theory Computer science Cryptography Discrete mathematics Geometry Logic Mathematics Number theory Physics Science Set theory Statistics Topology Science History of science    Philosophy of science    Systems science    Mathematics    Biology    Chemistry    Physics    Earth sciences    Technology    What are portals? List of portals edit   In other Wikimedia projects The following Wikimedia sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Mathematics&oldid=686628022" Categories: Mathematics portal Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikinews Wikisource Wikiversity Languages ???? ??????? ???? ????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français G?k?y? ??? ??????? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Lietuvi? Lumbaart Magyar ?????????? Malti Bahasa Melayu ?????????? Nederlands ??? O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? Polski Português Român? Runa Simi ??????? Shqip ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? ?????? / srpski Suomi Svenska ????? Taqbaylit ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 20 October 2015, at 08:24. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Science |||Portal:Science From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Science History of science    Philosophy of science    Systems science    Mathematics    Biology    Chemistry    Physics    Earth sciences    Technology    Main page   Categories & Main topics   Related portals & WikiProjects   Things you can do edit The Science Portal For a topic outline of science, see Outline of science. Meissner effect Science is the methodical study of nature including testable explanations and predictions. From classical antiquity through the 19th century, science as a type of knowledge was more closely linked to philosophy than it is now and, in fact, in the Western world, the term "natural philosophy" encompassed fields of study that are today associated with science, such as astronomy, medicine, and physics. However, during the Islamic Golden Age foundations for the scientific method were laid by Ibn al-Haytham in his Book of Optics. While the classification of the material world by the ancient Indians and Greeks into air, earth, fire and water was more philosophical, medieval Middle Easterns used practical, experimental observation to classify materials. Today, the ever-evolving term "science" refers to the pursuit of knowledge, not the knowledge itself. It is often synonymous with "natural and physical science" and often restricted to those branches of study relating to the phenomena of the material universe and their laws. Although the term implies exclusion of pure mathematics, many university faculties include Mathematics Departments within their Faculty of Science. The dominant sense in ordinary use has a narrower use for the term "science." It developed as a part of science becoming a distinct enterprise of defining the "laws of nature"; early examples include Kepler's laws, Galileo's laws, and Newton's laws of motion. In this period it became more common to refer to natural philosophy as "natural science." Over the course of the 19th century, the word "science" became increasingly associated with the disciplined study of the natural world, including physics, chemistry, geology and biology. This sometimes left the study of human thought and society in a linguistic limbo, which was resolved by classifying these areas of academic study as social science. For example, psychology evolved from philosophy, and has grown into an area of study. Currently, there are both "hard" (e.g. biological psychology) and "soft" science (e.g. social psychology) fields within the discipline. As a result, and as is consistent with the unfolding of the study of knowledge and development of methods to establish facts, each area of psychology employs a scientific method. Reflecting the evolution of the development of knowledge and established facts and the use of the scientific method, Psychology Departments in universities are found within: Faculty of Arts and Science, Faculty of Arts, and a Faculty of Science. Similarly, several other major areas of disciplined study and knowledge exist today under the general rubric of "science", such as formal science and applied science. More about Science... View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article A space elevator is a hypothetical structure designed to transport material from a planet's surface into space. Many different types of space elevator structures have been proposed. They all share the goal of replacing rocket propulsion with the traversal of a fixed structure via a mechanism not unlike an elevator, hence its name, in order to move material into or beyond orbit. Space elevators have also sometimes been referred to as space bridges, beanstalks, space ladders or space lifts. The most common proposal is a tether (usually a cable or ribbon) that spans from the surface to a point beyond geosynchronous orbit. As the planet rotates, the inertia at the end of the tether counteracts gravity and keeps the tether taut. Vehicles can then climb the tether and escape the planet's gravity without the use of rockets. Such a structure could eventually permit delivery of great quantities of cargo and people to orbit, and at costs only a fraction of those associated with current means. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Selected picture Credit: Earth Sciences and Image Analysis Laboratory, NASA View of the Earth as seen by the Apollo 17 crew traveling toward the moon. This translunar coast photograph extends from the Mediterranean Sea area to the Antarctica south polar ice cap. This is toward the northeast. Earth, also known as Terra, and (mostly in the 19th century) Tellus, is the third-closest planet to the Sun. It is the largest of the solar system's terrestrial planets and the only planetary body that modern science confirms as harboring life. Scientific evidence indicates that the planet formed around 4.57 billion years ago, and shortly thereafter (4.533 billion years ago) acquired its single natural satellite, the Moon. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Selected biography Carl Edward Sagan (November 9, 1934 – December 20, 1996) was an American astronomer, astrobiologist, and highly successful science popularizer. He pioneered exobiology and promoted the Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence (SETI). He is world-famous for writing popular science books and for co-writing and presenting the award-winning 1980 television series Cosmos: A Personal Voyage, which was the most-watched PBS program until Ken Burns' The Civil War in 1990. A book to accompany the program was also published. He also wrote the novel Contact, the basis for the 1997 film of the same name starring Jodie Foster. During his lifetime, Sagan published more than 600 scientific papers and popular articles and was author, co-author, or editor of more than 20 books. In his works, he frequently advocated scientific skepticism, humanism, and the scientific method. ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Did you know... ...that the endangered golden lion tamarin (pictured) has a long, but not prehensile, tail? ...that the Witch's hat is the common name of a colourful orange-red toadstool? ...that Grandi's series 1 ? 1 + 1 ? 1 + • • • is divergent and appears to equal 0, yet in some sense "sums" to 1?2 — a paradox once linked to the creation ex nihilo of the universe? ...that Derek Freeman was an anthropologist whose refutation of Margaret Mead's work "ignited controversy of a scale, visibility, and ferocity never before seen in anthropology"? ...that the New Year's Eve snowstorm of 1963/1964 dropped over 17 inches of snow at Huntsville, Alabama, simultaneously setting new snowfall records for any day, week, or month in their history? ...Archive/Nominations Read more... edit   Associated Wikimedia Science portal on Wikinews     Science on Wikiquote     Science subject on Wikibooks     Science portal on Wikisource     Science category on Wikicommons     Science category on Wiktionary     Wikiversity School of Science News Quotations Manuals Texts Images Definitions Learning Wikipedia's Portals All Portals Overview Glossaries Indices Lists Outlines Categories Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Featured portals About portals Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Science&oldid=714543061" Categories: Science portal Science Science portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikinews Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Català Cebuano Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Limburgs ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ????? Oromoo O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ?????? Português Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ??????? Seeltersk Setswana ????? ???? Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ?????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? ?? Wolof ?? Xitsonga ?????? ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 10 April 2016, at 11:29. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Society |||Portal:Society From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Sociology portals: Arts · Anthropology · Community · Culture · Economics · Education · Geography · Gender studies · Globalization · History · Human rights · Internet · Law · Philosophy · Social movements · Social sciences · Social welfare and social work · Society edit   The Society Portal Social network analysis diagram A human society is a group of people related to each other through continued relations, or a large social grouping sharing the same geographical or virtual territory, same interests, subject to the same political authority and dominant cultural expectations. Human societies are characterized by patterns of relationships (social relations) between individuals who share a distinctive culture and institutions. A given society may be described as the sum total of such relationships among its constituent members. In the social sciences, a larger society often evinces stratification and/or dominance patterns in subgroups. In so far as it is collaborative, a society can enable its members to benefit in ways that would not otherwise be possible on an individual basis; both individual and social (common) benefits can thus be distinguished, or in many cases found to overlap. A society can also consist of like-minded people governed by their own norms and values within a dominant, larger society. This is sometimes referred to as a subculture, a term used extensively within criminology: an organized group working together having a common interests, beliefs, or profession. More broadly, a society may be described as an economic, social, or industrial infrastructure, made up of a varied collection of individuals or subgroups. Members of a society may be from different ethnic groups. A society can be a particular ethnic group, such as the Saxons; a nation state, such as Bhutan; or a broader cultural group, such as a Western society. The word society may also refer to an organized voluntary association of people for religious, benevolent, cultural, scientific, political, patriotic, or other purposes. A "society" may also be a group of social organisms such as an ant colony, or any cooperative aggregate such as, for example, in some formulations of artificial intelligence. More about society… View new selections below (purge) edit   Selected article The Tamil people are an ethnic group from South Asia with a recorded history going back almost two millennia. The oldest Tamil communities are those of southern India and north-eastern Sri Lanka. Unlike many ethnic groups, the Tamils have at no time been governed by a single political entity; Tamil?akam, the traditional name for the Tamil lands, has always been under the rule of more than one kingdom or state. Despite this, the Tamil cultural identity has always been strong. Historically, this identity has been primarily linguistic, with Tamils being those whose first language was Tamil. In recent times, however, the definition has been broadened to also include emigrants of Tamil descent who maintain Tamil traditions, even when they no longer speak the language. Tamils are ethnically, linguistically and culturally related to the other Dravidian peoples of South Asia. There are an estimated 74 million Tamils around the world. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured picture Credit: Photo: Marcello Casal Jr, Agência Brasil A United Nations vehicle patrols the streets of the Bel-Air neighborhood of Port-au-Prince in the aftermath of the catastrophic 2010 Haiti earthquake. The earthquake occurred at 16:53 local time (21:53 UTC) on Tuesday, 12 January 2010. An estimated three million people were affected by the earthquake, with an estimated 280,000 buildings severely damaged or destroyed. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Did you know... ... that the desert plants pale wolfberry (pictured) and Berlandier's wolfberry were both used by native Americans for medicinal purposes? ... that the Central Committee of the Commission for Organizing the Party of the Working People of Ethiopia included only one woman? ... that in 1992 the leader of the Gambela People's Liberation Movement, Agwa Alemu, was killed by his own troops? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Anniversaries this month 4 April 1930 - Foundation of the American Rocket Society, originally named the American Interplanetary Society 13 April 1564 - Pope Pius IV approved the Society of the Holy Name 19 April 1866 - First anti-cruelty law was passed since the founding of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Brooklyn chapter pictured) 22 April 2008 - IEEE Power Engineering Society changed its name to IEEE Power & Energy Society More anniversaries... edit   Selected biography Dyer Daniel Lum (1839–April 6, 1893) was a 19th-century American anarchist labor activist and poet. A leading anarcho-syndicalist and a prominent left-wing intellectual of the 1880s, he is remembered as the lover and mentor of early anarcha-feminist Voltairine de Cleyre. Lum was a prolific writer who wrote a number of key anarchist texts, and contributed to publications including Mother Earth, Twentieth Century, Liberty (Benjamin Tucker's individualist anarchist journal), The Alarm (the journal of the International Working People's Association) and The Open Court among others. Following the arrest of Albert Parsons, Lum edited The Alarm from 1892–1893. Traditionally portrayed as a "genteel, theoretical anarchist", Lum has recently been recast by the scholarship of Paul Avrich as an "uncompromising rebel thirsty for violence and martyrdom" in the light of his involvement in the Haymarket affair in 1886. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured audio January 28, 2008 – State of the Union Address by President George W. Bush George W. Bush's address, given on the first floor of the House of Representatives at the Capitol. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories Society ? Society portal ? Society by continent ? Society by nationality ? Sociology ? Fictional society ? Anti-social behaviour ? Business ? Civil society ? Clubs and societies ? Communication ? Corporate groups ? Crime ? Culture ? Disability ? Economics ? Education ? Social events ? Family ? Feminism and society ? Society in fiction ? Folklore ? Health ? Social history ? Home ? Humans ? Inequality ? Social institutions ? Social issues ? Society-related lists ? Mating systems ? Matronymics ? Medicine in society ? Military ? Society museums ? Nationality ? Organizations ? Patronymics ? People ? Philosophy and society ? Politics ? Postindustrial society ? Private law ? Race and society ? Religion and society ? Rural society ? Science in society ? Sexuality and society ? Social change ? Social media ? Social responsibility ? Social sciences ? Social work ? Socioeconomics ? Technology in society ? Water and society ? Wikipedia books on society ? Society portals edit   WikiProjects Related projects Community Ethnic groups Family and relationships Former countries Gender Studies LGBT studies Literature Sexology and sexuality Sociology Travel and Tourism What are WikiProjects? edit   Selected quote “ The basic discovery about any people is the discovery of the relationship between its men and its women. ” — Pearl S. Buck ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Recognized content Featured articles 2012 phenomenon W. E. B. Du Bois Female genital mutilation From The Doctor to my son Thomas Fuck (film) Fuck: Word Taboo and Protecting Our First Amendment Liberties Featured lists List of awards and nominations received by Penn & Teller: Bullshit! Good articles Timeline of the Egyptian revolution of 2011 Acting white African Americans in Omaha, Nebraska Agnosticism America's 60 Families Anarchism Anarchism in Cuba Anonymous (group) Anti-nuclear movement in Australia Archaeoastronomy Average Joe Balangoda Man Before the Dawn (book) Birth control Black Lives Matter Boerehaat The Bog People Bomis A Community of Witches Compulsory Miseducation Cult film Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact Culture of the Song dynasty Cutting the Mustard The Daily Stormer Demographics of the Supreme Court of the United States Diaphoneme Double burden Dreamtime (book) Émile Durkheim EST and The Forum in popular culture Ely and Littleport riots of 1816 Family in advertising Family structure in the United States Feminism Feminist economics The finger First World First interracial kiss on television Forensic anthropology Free Expression Policy Project Fucking Machines God's Choice Erving Goffman History of agriculture Hitachi Magic Wand Hooray Henry I Ching Globalization and women in China Insects in culture Ivatan people Java Man Joint custody (United States) Ralph Larkin Lesbian LGBT Long hair Magic, Witchcraft and the Otherworld The Man-Eating Myth March of loyalty to martyrs Karl Marx Josef Mengele A More Perfect Union: Advancing New American Rights Mork Goes Erk No Lifeguard on Duty Nonviolent Communication Not My Presidents Day Not in Front of the Children On the Internet, nobody knows you're a dog Otaku Polyethnicity Protests against the Sri Lankan Civil War in Canada Proto-globalization Racial wage gap in the United States Reborn doll The Road to Total Freedom Romania in the Early Middle Ages Royal intermarriage Edward Said Sex, Sin, and Blasphemy Sheng nu Social identity theory Sociology of leisure Sociology Stay-at-home dad Sustainability Team effectiveness Think of the children Truce term Max Weber Benjamin Lee Whorf Florian Znaniecki Featured pictures File:Jane Addams - Bain News Service.jpg edit   Things you can do Here are some tasks awaiting attention: Article requests?: Check article requests in Business and economics topics • Social sciences topics • Requested pictures of society topics Assess?: Check article deletion discussions listed at Deletion sorting – Social science Cleanup?: check new articles for cleanup from Sociology-related new article feed Copyedit?: Check Sociology article alerts for interesting articles to copyedit Expand?: Expand articles in categories including: Culture, Law, Education, Politics Featured article candidates?: Review society-related articles submitted at Featured Article candidates, especially those at FAC urgents Good article nominations?: Check out articles under review for Good Article candidacy, in the Social sciences and society section Maintain?: Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Stubs?: Take on project for improvement of one of the Sociology stubs Verify?: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability edit   Related portals Arts Biography Community Culture Death Education Freedom of speech Human rights Internet Law LGBT Mind and brain Philosophy Politics Religion Sexuality Social movements Sociology Technology Writing edit   Web resources Society at DMOZ Definition of Society from the OED. Lecture notes on "Defining Society" from East Carolina University. Internet Modern History Sourcebook: Industrial Revolution "The Day the World Took Off" Six part video series from the University of Cambridge tracing the question "Why did the Industrial Revolution begin when and where it did." BBC History Home Page – Industrial Revolution National Museum of Science and Industry website – machines and personalities Industrial Revolution and the Standard of Living by Clark Nardinelli - the debate over whether standards of living rose or fell. Cliff Notes on Types of Societies edit   Associated Wikimedia Society on Wikibooks  Society on Wikimedia Commons Society on Wikinews  Society on Wikiquote  Society on Wikisource  Society on Wikiversity  Society on Wiktionary  Manuals and books Images and media News Quotations Texts Learning resources Definitions What are portals? List of portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Society&oldid=649229924" Categories: Society portal Society Society portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ??????? ???? ????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? Català Cebuano Deutsch Eesti ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? Bahasa Indonesia ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Lëtzebuergesch ?????????? Nederlands ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ?????? Polski Português ??????? ????? Soomaaliga ?????? ??????? Suomi ???????/tatarça Türkçe ???? ?????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 28 February 2015, at 14:11. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology |||Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Topics Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Science History of science    Philosophy of science    Systems science    Mathematics    Biology    Chemistry    Physics    Earth sciences    Technology    edit   The Technology Portal Astronaut Technology is the practical use of science, including the making, modification or improvement, applied activity or behavior, use and knowledge of tools, machines, techniques, crafts, systems, methods of organization, or environmental modifications or arrangement in order to solve a problem, improve a preexisting solution to a problem, achieve a goal or perform a specific function. It can also refer to the collection of such tools, machinery, modifications, environmental arrangement and procedures. Technologies significantly affect human as well as other animal species' ability to control and adapt to their natural environments. The word technology comes from Greek ?????????? (technología); from ????? (téchn?), meaning 'art, skill, craft', and -????? (-logía), meaning 'study of-'. The term can be applied either generally or to many specific areas, examples of which include construction technology, medical technology and information technology. The human species' use of technology began with the conversion of natural resources into simple tools. The prehistorical discovery of the ability to control fire increased the available sources of food and the invention of the wheel helped humans in travelling in and controlling their environment. Recent technological developments, including the printing press, the telephone, and the Internet, have lessened physical barriers to communication and allowed humans to interact freely on a global scale. However, not all technology has been used for peaceful purposes; the development of weapons of ever-increasing destructive power has progressed throughout history, from clubs to nuclear weapons. Technology has affected society and its surroundings in a number of ways. In many societies, technology has helped develop more advanced economies (including today's global economy) and has allowed the rise of a leisure class. Many technological processes produce unwanted by-products, known as pollution, and deplete natural resources, to the detriment of the Earth and its environment. Various implementations of technology influence the values of a society and new technology often raises new ethical questions. Examples include the rise of the notion of efficiency in terms of human productivity, a term originally applied only to machines, and the challenge of traditional norms. Philosophical debates have arisen over the present and future use of technology in society, with disagreements over whether technology improves the human condition or worsens it. Neo-Luddism, anarcho-primitivism, and similar movements criticise the pervasiveness of technology in the modern world, opining that it harms the environment and alienates people; proponents of ideologies such as transhumanism and techno-progressivism view continued technological progress as beneficial to society and the human condition. Indeed, until recently, it was believed that the development of technology was restricted only to human beings, but recent scientific studies indicate that other primates and certain dolphin communities have developed simple tools and learned to pass their knowledge to other generations. More about Technology... Refresh selections edit   Selected article The Hanford Site is a decommissioned nuclear production complex on the Columbia River in south-central Washington operated by the United States government. Established in 1943 as part of the Manhattan Project, it was home to the B-Reactor, the first full-scale plutonium production reactor in the world. During the Cold War, the project was expanded to include nine nuclear reactors and five massive plutonium processing complexes, which produced plutonium for most of the 60,000 weapons in the U.S. nuclear arsenal. Nuclear technology developed rapidly during this period, and Hanford scientists produced many notable technological achievements. However, many of the early safety procedures and waste disposal practices were inadequate. Government documents have since confirmed that Hanford's operations released significant amounts of radioactive materials to the air and to the Columbia River, threatening the health of residents and ecosystems. Today, Hanford is the most contaminated nuclear site in the United States and is the focus of the nation's largest environmental cleanup effort. While most of the current activity at the site is related to the cleanup project, Hanford also hosts a commercial nuclear power plant, the Columbia Generating Station, and various centers for scientific research and development. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   In this month 2 April 1975 – Construction of the CN Tower in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, tops out, beginning the 553.33 metres (1,815.4 ft) tower's 34 year reign as the world's tallest free-standing structure 3 April 2010 – The first iPad (pictured) is released by Apple, Inc. 10 April 1861 – Governor of Massachusetts John Albion Andrew signs a charter incorporating the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 15 April 1912 – The RMS Titanic, at the time the world's largest ship, sinks after hitting an iceberg the night before in one of the deadliest peacetime maritime disasters in history More anniversaries... edit   Did you know... ... that in 2010, three of the four largest power stations in the world were in South America? ... that a Rans S-6 Coyote II (pictured), a type of homebuilt aircraft, has flown across the Atlantic Ocean twice? ... that Stephen Fry asked on Twitter for suggestions to name a BBC television series on the impact of the Internet, now called The Virtual Revolution? ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Featured biography John Douglas (1830–1911) was an English architect who designed about 500 buildings in Cheshire, North Wales and northwest England, in particular in the estate of Eaton Hall. Douglas' output included the creation, restoration and renovation of churches, church furnishings, houses and other buildings. His architectural styles were eclectic and many of his works incorporate elements of the English Gothic style. He was also influenced by architectural styles from the mainland of Europe and included elements of French, German and Netherlandish architecture into his works. He is remembered for his use of half-timbering, tile-hanging, pargeting, decorative brick in diapering and the design of tall chimney stacks. Of particular importance is Douglas' use of joinery and highly detailed wood carving. Throughout his career he attracted commissions from wealthy landowners and industrialists. Most of his works have survived. The city of Chester contains a number of his structures, the most admired of which are his half-timbered black-and-white buildings and Eastgate Clock. The highest concentration of his work is found in the Eaton Hall estate and the surrounding villages of Eccleston, Aldford and Pulford. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Wikiprojects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Telecommunications Woodworking What are WikiProjects? edit   Selected quote “ If the Internet teaches us anything, it is that great value comes from leaving core resources in a commons, where they're free for people to build upon as they see fit. ” — Lawrence Lessig, (2001) ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Selected picture Credit: Maas Digital LLC NASA's Mars Exploration Rover Mission (MER) is an ongoing robotic space mission involving two rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, exploring the planet Mars. ...Archive/Nominations More... edit   Categories Computing · Classes of computers · Companies · Computer architecture · Computer model · Computer science · Computer security · Computing and society · Data · Embedded systems · Information systems · Information technology · Internet · Languages · Multimedia · Networks · Operating systems · Platforms · Product lifecycle management · Real-time computing · Software · Security ·More... Electronics · Avionics · RF & MMIC Design · Circuits · Companies · Connectors · Consumer electronics · Digital electronics · Digital media · Electrical components · Electronic design · Electronics manufacturing · Embedded systems · Integrated circuits · Microwave technology · Molecular electronics · Water technology · Optoelectronics · Quantum electronics · Radio-frequency identification · Radio electronics · Semiconductors · Signal cables · Surveillance · Telecommunications · Terminology · More... Engineering: Aerospace engineering · Biological engineering · Chemical engineering · Civil engineering · Computer engineering · Electrical engineering · Electronic engineering · Environmental engineering · Geotechnical engineering · Industrial engineering · Marine engineering · Materials science · Mechanical engineering · Nuclear technology · Signal processing · Software engineering · Structural engineering Transport · Aviation · Rail transport · Spaceflight · Road transport · Water transport Timelines: Technology timelines Other sub-categories: Agriculture · Animation · Architecture · Carpentry · Communications · Education · Electrical wiring · Machining · Manufacturing · Medicine · Metalworking · Optics · Plumbing · Tools · Welding · Woodworking edit   Main topics Technology Technological concepts and issues – Appropriate technology • Clean technology • Diffusion of innovations in science • Doomsday device • Ecotechnology • Environmental technology • High technology • History of science and technology • History of technology • Industry • Innovation • Knowledge economy • Persuasion technology • Pollution • Posthumanism • Precautionary principle • Research and development • Science, technology, and society • Strategy of technology • Superpowers • Sustainable technology • Technicism • Technocapitalism • Technocriticism • Techno-progressivism • Technological convergence • Technological evolution • Technological determinism • Technological diffusion • Technological singularity • Technology acceptance model • Technology assessment • Technology lifecycle • Technology transfer • Technology Tree • Technorealism • Timeline of invention • Transhumanism Technologies and applied sciences – Aerospace • Agriculture, Agricultural science & Agronomy • Architecture • Artificial intelligence • Automation • Automobile • Big Science • Biotechnology • Cartography • Chemical engineering • Communication • Computing (Computer science, List of open problems in computer science, Programming, Software engineering, Information technology, Computer engineering) • Construction • Design • Electronics • Energy development • Energy storage • Engineering • Ergonomics • Firefighting • Forensics • Forestry • Free software • Health sciences • Health Informatics • Industry • Information science • Internet • Library and information science • Machines • Management • Manufacturing • Mass communication • Mass production • Medicine (Unsolved problems in neuroscience) • Military science • Military technology and equipment • Mining • Nanotechnology • Nuclear technology • Packaging and labeling • Processes • Robotics • Space exploration • Technology forecasting • Telecommunications • Tools • Transport • Vehicles • Weapons edit   News From the Wikinews Science and technology portal April 8: GNOME to be Ubuntu's default desktop environment, Canonical to stop investing in Ubuntu Phone March 27: President Trump tells NASA to aim for Mars March 22: Jeff Jones resigns as president of Uber March 9: Scientists say excess cerebrospinal fluid may serve as early sign of autism February 9: Scientists say new medical diagnostic chip can sort cells anywhere with an inkjet January 15: Geneticists produce laser-activated killer mice January 4: Slow-cooking dinosaur eggs may have contributed to extinction, say scientists December 29: Around 7,100 cheetahs remain, say experts December 26: Study confirms efficacy of NewLink Genetics ebola vaccine December 11: Scientists find dinosaur feathers preserved in amber edit   Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures edit   Related portals Agriculture and Agronomy Astronomy Aviation Biotechnology Bridges Computer science Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Health Infrastructure Information technology Mathematics Medicine Nanotechnology Nuclear technology Philosophy of science Radio Renewable energy Robotics Science Software Spaceflight Sustainable development Telecom Television Trains Transport War edit   Associated Wikimedia Technology on Wikibooks  Technology on Wikimedia Commons Technology on Wikinews  Technology on Wikiquote  Technology on Wikisource  Technology on Wikiversity  Technology on Wiktionary  Manuals and books Images and media News Quotations Texts Learning resources Definitions edit   Wikipedia's portals All Portals Overview Glossaries Indices Lists Outlines Categories Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Featured portals About portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=737901506" Categories: Technology portal Technology portals Technology Science portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages ???? ??????? ????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? Bahasa Indonesia ????? ??????? Kurdî Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? Nederlands ??? ??????? Occitan ????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ?????? ??????? Suomi Svenska ????? Taqbaylit Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? ???? Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 5 September 2016, at 18:25. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Contents/Portals |||Portal:Contents/Portals From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia < Portal:Contents Jump to: navigation, search Contents Overview Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology edit  watch   Wikipedia's contents: Portals General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places    Health and fitness     History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences    People and self    Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences About portals · Portal directory · Portals category Shortcuts: P: P:CP WP:8 WP:PORT Portals complement main topics in Wikipedia, and expound upon topics by introducing the reader to key articles, images, and categories that further describe the subject and its related topics. Portals also assist in helping editors to find related projects and things they can do to improve Wikipedia, and provide a unique way to navigate Wikipedia topics. At present, there are 1491 portals. WikiProject Directory Regional Notice Boards You can also use the Special:Search box below to locate Portals and sub-pages. edit  watch   General reference   (see in all page types) Library and information science edit  watch   Culture and the arts   (see in all page types) Culture Language: Constructed languages (Esperanto), English Arts (Aesthetics) Literature: Books • Comics • Children's literature • French literature • Poetry • Writing Authors: Jane Austen • Charles Dickens • William Shakespeare • Oscar Wilde • Kazi Nazrul Islam Novels: Dragonlance, Harry Potter, Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy Fictional worlds: Discworld, James Bond, Middle-earth, Narnia, Oz, Fictional characters Performing arts Dance: Ballet Film: A Nightmare on Elm Street, Academy Award, Alien, Animation, Bollywood, Disney, Indiana Jones, Silent film, Star Wars Music: Music of Australia • Music of Canada  • Record production Styles: Alternative rock, Blues, Christian music, Classical guitar, Classical music, Country music, Electronic music, Eurovision, Guitar, Heavy metal (Christian metal), Hip hop, Indian classical music, Industrial music, Jazz, K-pop, Latin music, Marching band, Percussion, Piano, Pipe organ, Pop music, Progressive rock, Punk rock, Rock and Roll, Rock music, R&B and Soul Music Artists: AC/DC, AKB48, A. R. Rahman, Bryan Adams, Aerosmith, Christina Aguilera, Backstreet Boys, The Beach Boys, The Beatles, Justin Bieber, Björk, Brandy Norwood, Mariah Carey, Cher, Kelly Clarkson, The Clash, Miley Cyrus, Celine Dion, Dream Theater, Bob Dylan, Grateful Dead, Eminem, Fergie, Marvin Gaye, Girls Aloud, Green Day, Iron Maiden, The Jackson Family, Janet Jackson, Michael Jackson, The Kinks, Beyoncé, Lady Gaga, Avril Lavigne, Led Zeppelin, Linkin Park, Madonna, Miles Davis, Motörhead, Katy Perry, Pink Floyd, Powderfinger, Elvis Presley, Queen, Rihanna, The Rolling Stones, Sakis Rouvas, Rush, Santana, Britney Spears, The Supremes, Slipknot, Shania Twain, Shreya Ghoshal, U2, Usher, Rufus Wainwright, Neil Young, Frank Zappa, Shakira Opera: Gilbert & Sullivan Television: Australian television, BBC, The Big Bang Theory, Buffy the Vampire Slayer, Cartoon Network, Doctor Who, EastEnders, Ed, Edd n Eddy, Family Guy, Friends, Futurama, House, M.D., M*A*S*H, Millennium, Monty Python, Muppets, Nickelodeon, SpongeBob SquarePants, Star Trek, 24, The Simpsons, Sherlock Holmes Theatre: Musical theatre Visual arts: Portal:Anime and manga (Dragon Ball) • Architecture (Portal) • Cartoon • Computer graphics • Design • Graffiti • Origami • Photography • Studio Ghibli • Textile arts (Fashion, Knitting) • Typography Genre: Comedy • Furry • Horror fiction • King Arthur • Mythology • Pornography • Speculative fiction • Steampunk • Superhero fiction Recreation and Entertainment Food: Bacon Drink: Beer, Coffee, Liquor, Wine Sports: Asian Games · Association football (A-League, Football in Argentina, Association football variants, Football in Africa, Football in Germany, Football in India, English football, Soccer in the United States, Women's association football) • Athletics • Australian rules football • Badminton • Baseball • Basketball (College basketball, National Basketball Association) • Sport of Canada • Commonwealth Games • Cricket (Australian cricket team in England in 1948, Indian Premier League) • Cycling • Fencing • Figure skating • Fishing • Gridiron football (American football, Canadian football, College football, National Football League) • Golf • Gymnastics • Handball • Horse racing • Ice hockey • Martial arts (Karate) • Olympics • Paralympics • Professional wrestling • Racing (Motorsport: Formula One, NASCAR, Motorcycle racing) • Rock climbing • Rugby (Rugby league, Rugby union) • Sailing • Snooker • Tennis • Water sports (Swimming, Underwater diving)  • Women's sport Games: Amusement parks • Strategy games (Chess, Warhammer) • Role-playing games (Dungeons & Dragons) Video games: Final Fantasy • Halo • Mario • Massively multiplayer online games • Nintendo • PlayStation • Pokémon • Sega • SNK  • The Sims • Sonic the Hedgehog • Xbox • Zelda Hobbies, Crafts and Other: Gardening • Gemology and Jewelry • Home improvement • Numismatics • Philately • Radio • Scouting • Toys (Lego) edit  watch   Geography and places   (see in all page types) Geography (Atlas • Islands • Mountains) Africa Algeria • Angola • Benin • Botswana • Burkina Faso • Burundi • Cameroon • Cape Verde • Central African Republic • Chad • Côte d'Ivoire • Republic of the Congo • Democratic Republic of the Congo • Djibouti • Egypt • Eritrea • Ethiopia • Gabon • The Gambia • Ghana • Guinea • Guinea-Bissau • Kenya  (Mombasa, Nairobi) • Liberia • Libya • Madagascar • Malawi • Mali • Mauritania • Mauritius • Morocco • Mozambique • Namibia • Niger • Nigeria (Port Harcourt, Lagos)  • Rwanda • São Tomé and Príncipe • Senegal • Sierra Leone • Somalia • South Africa • South Sudan • Sudan • Tanzania • Togo • Tunisia • Uganda • Western Sahara • Zambia • Zimbabwe Antarctica • Arctic Asia Bhutan • Bangladesh • (Bengal, Chittagong, Dhaka) • Cambodia • China (Beijing, Hong Kong, Macau, Shanghai, Shenzhen, Tibet) • Taiwan • Himalaya region • India (Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal (Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Chandigarh, Chennai, Delhi, Hisar, Hyderabad, Kolkata, Kollam, Mumbai, Patna, Trichy, Udaipur, Jodhpur) • Indonesia • Japan (Osaka, Tokyo) • Kazakhstan • Korea (North Korea, South Korea, Seoul) • Kyrgyzstan • Malaysia • Mongolia • Nepal • Pakistan (Chitral, Karachi, Lahore, Jhelum, Islamabad, Sialkot) • Philippines (Bohol) • Punjab • SAARC • Singapore • Sri Lanka • Tajikistan • Thailand • Turkey • Vietnam Europe European Union Austria (Vienna, Tyrol) • Basque • Belgium (Brussels) • Bulgaria • Channel Islands • Corsica • Croatia • Czech Republic (Prague) • Denmark • Estonia • Finland • France (Paris, Lyon) • Germany (Baden-Württemberg • Bavaria • East Frisia • Hamburg • Lower Saxony • North Rhine-Westphalia • Saxony-Anhalt • Schleswig-Holstein) • Gibraltar • Greece (Macedonia) • Hungary (Budapest, Miskolc) • Ireland (Kilkenny) • Italy (Rome, Milan, Venice) • Latvia • Lithuania • Luxembourg • Malta • Netherlands • Poland • Portugal • Romania  (Bucharest) • Silesia • Slovakia • Slovenia • Spain (Galicia) • Sweden • United Kingdom (England (Bristol, Cornwall, Devon, Hertfordshire, Lincolnshire, London, Luton, Stamford, North West England (Cheshire, Cumbria, Greater Manchester, Merseyside, Yorkshire), Somerset, Wiltshire, South East England (East Sussex, Kent, Hampshire, Oxfordshire)) • Northern Ireland, Scotland, Wales) Albania (Tirana) • Andorra • Armenia • Azerbaijan • Belarus • Bosnia and Herzegovina • Catalan-speaking countries • Faroe Islands • Georgia • Iceland • Isle of Man • Kosovo • Republic of Macedonia • Moldova • Montenegro • Norway • Russia  (Chechnya, Moscow) • Serbia • Switzerland (Geneva) • Turkey • Ukraine (Crimea) • Vatican City Latin America and Caribbean Argentina (Buenos Aires • Rosario)  • Belize • Bermuda • Brazil • Bolivia • Chile (Pichilemu) • Colombia • Costa Rica • Cuba • Dominican Republic • Ecuador • El Salvador • Guatemala • Guyana • Haiti • Jamaica • Mexico • Nicaragua • Panama • Paraguay • Peru • Puerto Rico • Suriname • Trinidad and Tobago • Uruguay • Venezuela Places near you Middle East Afghanistan • Cyprus • Egypt • Iran (Tabaristan) • Iraq • Israel (Jerusalem) • Jordan • Kazakhstan • Kurdistan • Lebanon • Libya • Morocco • Oman • Palestine • Saudi Arabia • Syria • Tajikistan • Turkey • United Arab Emirates (Abu Dhabi) • Uzbekistan  North America Canada:  • Geography of Canada Alberta (Calgary, Edmonton) • British Columbia (Vancouver) • Manitoba • New Brunswick • Newfoundland and Labrador (St. John's) • Northwest Territories • Nova Scotia • Nunavut • Ontario (Eastern Ontario • Ottawa •Toronto • Hamilton) • Prince Edward Island  • Quebec (Montreal, Quebec City, Estrie, Laurentides, Saguenay–Lac-Saint-Jean) • Saskatchewan • Yukon Mexico  San Diego–Tijuana United States Alabama • Alaska • Arizona (Grand Canyon) • Arkansas • California (Greater Los Angeles • San Diego • San Diego–Tijuana, San Francisco Bay Area) • Colorado • Connecticut • Delaware • District of Columbia • Florida  (Jacksonville • Miami) • Georgia • Hawaii • Idaho • Illinois (Chicago) • Indiana (Indianapolis) • Iowa • Kansas • Kentucky (Louisville) • Louisiana (New Orleans) • Maine • Maryland • Massachusetts  (Boston) • Michigan (Detroit) • Minnesota • Mississippi • Missouri • Montana • Nebraska • Nevada (Las Vegas) • New England • New Hampshire • New Jersey • New Mexico • New York (New York City • Capital District • Finger Lakes • Hudson Valley • Syracuse) • North Carolina • North Dakota • Ohio (Cleveland) • Oklahoma • Oregon • Pennsylvania (Erie • Lancaster • Philadelphia • Pittsburgh) • Puerto Rico • Rhode Island • South Carolina • South Dakota • Tennessee • Texas (Austin • Dallas • Houston) • Utah • Vermont • Virginia • Washington (Seattle) • West Virginia • Wisconsin • Wyoming Oceania Australia Australian Capital Territory • New South Wales (City of Bankstown • Sydney) • Northern Territory • Queensland (Brisbane) • South Australia • Tasmania • Victoria (Melbourne) • Western Australia (Perth) Kiribati • Micronesia • New Zealand • Papua New Guinea • Tuvalu edit  watch   Health and fitness   (see in all page types) Health and fitness Medicine • Biology • Nursing • Dentistry • Food • Pharmacy and Pharmacology • Psychiatry • Pervasive developmental disorders • Complementary and Alternative Medicine • Sexuality • Viruses • Trauma & Orthopaedics • Sports edit  watch   History and events   (see in all page types) History American Old West • Ancient Egypt • Ancient Germanic Culture • Ancient Greece • Ancient Japan • Ancient Near East • Ancient Rome (Military of ancient Rome) • Anglo-Saxon England • Crown of Aragon • Archaeology • Ashura • Austria-Hungary • British Empire • Bulgarian Empire • Byzantine Empire • Classical Civilization • Colonialism • Disasters  • German Empire • Heraldry • History of Canada • History of the Latter Day Saint movement • History of Science • Indian independence movement • Khitan • Mesoamerica • Middle Ages • Nazi Germany • New France • Russian Empire • Sasanian Empire • Soviet Union  War:American Revolutionary War • American Civil War • Cold War • Italian Wars • Liberation War • Military history of France • Military history of Africa • Military history of the Ottoman Empire • Napoleonic Wars • September 11 attacks • Syrian civil war • World War I • World War II 1920s • 1930s • 1940s • 1950s • 1960s • 1970s • 1980s • 1990s • 2000s • 2010s Current events Sports Time Winter • Autumn Chronology edit  watch   Mathematics and logic   (see in all page types) Mathematics Algebra • Analysis • Category theory • Cryptography • Discrete mathematics • Geometry • Number theory • Topology Logic Set theory  Statistics  edit  watch   Natural and physical sciences   (see in all page types) Science History of Science • Philosophy of science • Systems science Biological science Agropedia • Amphibians and Reptiles • Animals • Arthropods • Astrobiology • Birds • Cats • Cetaceans • Crustaceans • Dinosaurs • Dogs • Ecology • Evolutionary biology • Extinct and Endangered Species • Fish • Forestry • Fungi • Gastropods • Horses • Insects  • Mammals • Marine life • Molecular Anthropology • Molecular and Cellular Biology (Metabolism, Gene wiki) • Neuroscience • Paleontology • Plants • Primates • Prehistoric mammals • Rabbits and hares • Sharks • Trees • Turtles • Viruses • Wildlife of Scotland • Wetlands Physical science Astronomy (Space, Solar System, Mars, Moon, Uranus, Jupiter, Star, X-ray astronomy)  Chemistry (Analytical chemistry, Organic chemistry, Physical chemistry, Crystallography)  Earth sciences (Atmospheric sciences, Earthquakes, Environment, Fire, Global warming, Tropical cyclones, Volcanoes and Volcanology, Weather, Water)  Physics (Cosmology, Gravitation, Electromagnetism) edit  watch   People and self   (see in all page types) Biography • Death • Human rights • Community • Gangs • Mind and brain • Thinking • Sexuality • LGBT • Serer • Transgender • Yoruba • Igbo edit  watch   Philosophy and thinking   (see in all page types) Philosophy Areas of philosophical inquiry Aesthetics • Epistemology • Ethics • Logic • Metaphysics • Mind and Brain (Thinking) • Philosophy of science • Social and political philosophy  Philosophies and ideologies Anarchism • Animal rights • Capitalism • Communism • Confucianism • Conservatism • Existentialism • Fascism • Liberalism • Libertarianism • Left-wing populism • Right-wing populism • Socialism • Taoism • Transhumanism edit  watch   Religion and belief systems   (see in all page types) Religion (Spirituality, Occult) Abrahamic religions Christianity Adventism • Anabaptism • Anglicanism • Arminianism • Baptist • Bible • Calvinism • Catholicism • Christadelphians • Christianity in China • Christianity in India • Eastern Christianity • Lutheranism • Methodism • Oriental Orthodoxy • Pope • Private revelation • Saints • Seventh-day Adventist Church Latter Day Saints Book of Mormon • LDS Church • Community of Christ Islam Shia Islam • Day Of Ashura • Ahmadiyyat • Qur'an • Islam in China • Sufism Judaism Kabbalah Creationism Non-Abrahamic religions Indian religions Ayyavazhi Buddhism Mahayana Buddhism • Tibetan Buddhism • Vajrayana Buddhism • Theravada Buddhism Gnosticism Hinduism Hindu Mythology  Jainism Digambara ?v?t?mbara Sikhism Religions and traditions with East Asian origin Chinese Folk Religion Confucianism • Shinto • Taoism • Falun Gong Religions with West Asian origin Zoroastrianism Bábism Bahá'í Faith New religions Scientology • Falun Gong  Theosophy Religions with European origin Heathenism Hellenismos Greek Mythology Wicca Traditional African religions African Serer Other Astrology • Mythology Non Religion or Belief Atheism • Nontheism edit  watch   Society and social sciences   (see in all page types) Social sciences Anthropology (Archaeology) • Economics • Education • Geography • History • Law • Linguistics • Psychology • Sociology Society Cooperatives • Disability • Discrimination • Economics and business  • Education (Schools, University, University of Cambridge, University of Oxford, University of Pittsburgh) • Environment • Ethnic groups: African American, Berbers, Celts, Hispanic and Latino Americans, Indigenous peoples of the Americas, Indigenous peoples of North America, Aboriginal Canadians •  Feminism • Folklore • Freedom of speech • Freemasonry • Gender studies • Genealogy • Globalization • Holidays • Hunger relief • Journalism • LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender) • (Transgender) • Men's rights • Social movements • Sustainable development • Terrorism • Transhumanism • Transnational child protection•Migrant Domestic Workers in Lebanon Law Criminal justice• Human rights • Law of England and Wales• Laws in India • Supreme Court of the United States Politics and Political science Anarchism • Animal rights • British politics • Capitalism • Communism • Canadian politics • Christian democracy • Conservatism • Fascism • Geert Wilders • India Government • Liberalism • Right-wing populism • International organizations: (United Nations  • NATO • SAARC) • Organized Labour • Pakistan Government • Philippine Presidency • Republican Party • U.S. Government (Barack Obama) • Donald Trump  • Social welfare and social work Military science Canadian Forces • Military of Greece • Military of Australia • Military of the United Kingdom (British Army • Royal Navy • Royal Air Force) • Military of the United States (United States Air Force • United States Army • United States Coast Guard • United States Marine Corps • United States Navy) • Tank • Half-track • War • Weapons of mass destruction edit  watch   Technology and applied sciences   (see in all page types) Technology Engineering • Agriculture and Agronomy  • Astronomy • Biotechnology • Bridges • Electronics (Telecommunication) • Mass surveillance • Energy (Renewable energy) • Forestry • Hazardous Materials • Infrastructure • Laser • Mining • Nanotechnology • Nuclear technology • Robotics Computing and Information technology Computer networking (Internet, IRC) • Computer programming (Python programming, Java) • Computer science (Artificial intelligence, Computer graphics) • Computer security (Cryptography) • Software (Free software, Linux) • Amiga  • Smartphone • Apple  • Google (Android) • Microsoft• Alphabet Transport Aviation • Bicycles/Cycling • Buses • Cars (Australian, Japanese) • Trucks • London Transport • Nautical (Lighthouses, UK Waterways) • Roads (Australian Roads, Canada Roads, U.S. Roads, California Roads, Maryland Roads, Michigan Highways, New York Roads, Washington Roads) • Spaceflight • Trains (North American railways, Railways in India, Sri Lanka Railways, UK Railways, Trams, UK Trams) Portals List Directory WikiProject Guidelines Instructions Categorizing (Portals category) Contents Overview Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Content listings Types Overviews Featured content Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories People deaths this year Timelines centuries decades Indices A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Wikipedia books What are portals? List of portals Shortcuts to this page: Portal:Categories • P:CAT Purge cache to show recent changes Shortcuts to this page: WP:PORT • P: Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Contents/Portals&oldid=746645444" Categories: Wikipedia navigation Content portals Portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikiversity Languages Afrikaans Alemannisch ??????? Aragonés Arpetan ??????? ???? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????)? ????????? Boarisch Brezhoneg Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Frysk ??? ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Lëtzebuergesch Lumbaart Magyar ???? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? ????????? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Ripoarisch Român? ??????? Shqip Sicilianu ????? ???? Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ???? Vèneto Ti?ng Vi?t ?? Yorùbá ?? ?? Edit links This page was last modified on 28 October 2016, at 17:20. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Stephen_Breyer_official_SCOTUS_portrait_crop.jpg |||File:Stephen Breyer official SCOTUS portrait crop.jpg From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search File File history File usage Global file usage Metadata Size of this preview: 480 × 600 pixels. Other resolutions: 192 × 240 pixels | 384 × 480 pixels | 1,008 × 1,260 pixels. Original file ?(1,008 × 1,260 pixels, file size: 1.01 MB, MIME type: image/jpeg) This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below. Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help. Summary[edit] DescriptionStephen Breyer official SCOTUS portrait crop.jpg Official portrait of Supreme Court Justice Stephen Breyer. Date 2006 Source http://www.supremecourthistory.org/history/supremecourthistory_history_current_breyer.htm Author Steve Petteway, photographer for the US Supreme Court[1] Licensing[edit] Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work prepared by an officer or employee of the United States Government as part of that person’s official duties under the terms of Title 17, Chapter 1, Section 105 of the US Code. See Copyright. Note: This only applies to original works of the Federal Government and not to the work of any individual U.S. state, territory, commonwealth, county, municipality, or any other subdivision. This template also does not apply to postage stamp designs published by the United States Postal Service since 1978. (See § 313.6(C)(1) of Compendium of U.S. Copyright Office Practices). It also does not apply to certain US coins; see The US Mint Terms of Use. This file has been identified as being free of known restrictions under copyright law, including all related and neighboring rights. This file was reviewed on 29 September 2010 by the administrator or trusted user Jappalang (talk), who confirmed the Public Domain status on that date. Personality rightsPersonality rights warning Although this work is freely licensed or in the public domain, the person(s) shown may have rights that legally restrict certain re-uses unless those depicted consent to such uses. In these cases, a model release or other evidence of consent could protect you from infringement claims. Though not obliged to do so, the uploader may be able to help you to obtain such evidence. See our general disclaimer for more information. File history Click on a date/time to view the file as it appeared at that time. Date/Time Thumbnail Dimensions User Comment current 13:47, 10 August 2009 1,008 × 1,260 (1.01 MB) Gage {{Information |Description=Official portrait of Supreme Court Justice Stephen Breyer. |Source=http://www.supremecourthistory.org/02_history/subs_current/images_b/009.html |Date=2006 |Author=Collection of the Supreme Court of the United States, Photographe File usage More than 100 pages link to this file. The following list shows the first 100 page links to this file only. A full list is available. List of Jewish American politicians Supreme Court of the United States Talk:Main Page/Archive 34 User:4v4l0n42/Draft 6L User:4v4l0n42/Today User:Afterword User:Afterword/pretty User:AlMac User:Allard User:Bannus User:Brian/mainpage User:David Levy/Main2 User:David Levy/Test User:David Levy/Test2 User:Dbmag9/Main Page User:Drumguy8800/Main page draft User:ElAmericano/storage/mainpage1 User:Eloquence/Tour 01 User:Encephalon/Main User:FayssalF User:Getcrunk/Main Page Sandbox User:Go for it!/MP/nodiv User:Hemanshu/edmainpage User:Interiot/Main User:Jcrwiki~enwiki User:JonMoore/Main Page User:JustinWick/mydraft User:Kevin baas~enwiki/main page proposal User:Krik~enwiki/mp User:Krik~enwiki/nmp User:LEC20/Daily Diversions User:Lovelac7 User:Malomeat User:MarSch/Main body User:MarSch/Main page User:MattKingston User:Member/Wikipedia Front Page User:Mulad/portal User:Nickg331 User:NoSeptember/Main User:Node ue/MainPageTemplate2 User:Persian Poet Gal User:Porges/Main Page User:Quentin Smith/Shadow Main Page User:Ral315/Main Page User:RaptorX User:Siroxo/main page draft User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-22Jul User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-23Jul User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-24Jul User:Solipsist/MainPageTemp-25Jul User:Somoza/Zero-Phonon User:Talrias/Main Page User:Tazmaniacs User:The bellman User:Thetorpedodog/xptablefree User:Tim Robinson/Main Page (Proposal) User:Tom-/Main Page CSS test User:Tom-/NS4 test User:Tom-/sandbox User:U-Two User:Vincent7 User:Zafiroblue05/Draft User talk:Guty~enwiki User talk:Kevin baas~enwiki/main page proposal Wikipedia:Main Page/French2 Wikipedia:Main Page/Temp10 Wikipedia:Main Page/Test Wikipedia:Main Page/test Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (Italian-style) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (Old PDA version) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (blue boy) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (editable) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (executive) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (misty breeze) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (regal) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (shades of blue) Wikipedia:Main Page alternative (simple layout) Wikipedia:Today's featured article Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft/Draft 5 Archive Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft/Sj Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft/Test Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft2 Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft2 (fullsize text) Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft (Italian Inspired) Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft (current templates) Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft 0 Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft 6C Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft A Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft B Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft C Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft L Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft NOW Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft extra search box Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft extra search box2 Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/Draft no search box Wikipedia:WikiProject Usability/Main Page/NOW Global file usage The following other wikis use this file: Usage on cs.wikipedia.org Nejvyšší soud Spojených stát? amerických Usage on de.wikipedia.org Liste der Richter am Obersten Gerichtshof der Vereinigten Staaten Usage on es.wikipedia.org Estados Unidos contra Lara Usage on fa.wikipedia.org ????? ??????????? ????? ???????? Usage on it.wikipedia.org Corte suprema degli Stati Uniti d'America Usage on ja.wikipedia.org ???????? Usage on ko.wikipedia.org ?? ?? ??? Usage on mr.wikipedia.org ????????? ???????? ???????? Usage on pt.wikipedia.org Suprema Corte dos Estados Unidos Usage on ru.wikipedia.org ????????? ??? ??? Usage on sh.wikipedia.org Vrhovni sud SAD Usage on sv.wikipedia.org USA:s högsta domstol Usage on tl.wikipedia.org Kataas-taasang Hukuman ng Estados Unidos Usage on tr.wikipedia.org Amerika Birle?ik Devletleri Yüksek Mahkemesi Usage on zh.wikipedia.org ?????? Metadata This file contains additional information, probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state, some details may not fully reflect the modified file. Orientation Normal Horizontal resolution 300 dpi Vertical resolution 300 dpi Software used Adobe Photoshop 7.0 File change date and time 08:52, 10 August 2009 Color space sRGB Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Stephen_Breyer_official_SCOTUS_portrait_crop.jpg" Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces File Talk Variants Views Read View on Commons More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Upload file Special pages Page information Languages Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heffernan_v._City_of_Paterson |||Heffernan v. City of Paterson From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Heffernan v. City of Paterson Supreme Court of the United States Argued January 19, 2016 Decided April 26, 2016 Full case name Jeffrey Heffernan, Petitioner v. City of Paterson, et al. Docket nos. 14-1280 Citations 578 U.S. ___ (more) Opinion announcement Opinion announcement Prior history Jury finds in favor of the plaintiff, judge recuses for conflict of interest and case is retried; summary judgement in favor of the defense; Third Circuit reverses and remands; decision for the defense on remand; Third Circuit affirms Holding Police department's demotion of detective in response to mistaken belief he was supporting a challenger to the city's mayor in election violated his First Amendment rights regardless of his actual purpose. Judgement of the Third Circuit reversed and remanded. Court membership Chief Justice John G. Roberts Associate Justices Anthony Kennedy Clarence Thomas · Ruth Bader Ginsburg Stephen Breyer · Samuel Alito Sonia Sotomayor · Elena Kagan Case opinions Majority Breyer, joined by Roberts, Kennedy, Ginsburg, Sotomayor, Kagan Dissent Thomas, joined by Alito Laws applied U.S. Const. amend. I 42 U.S.C. § 1983 Heffernan v. City of Paterson, No. 14-1280, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in 2016 concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees. By a 6–2 margin, the Court held that a public employee's constitutional rights might be violated when an employer, believing that the employee was engaging in what would be protected speech, disciplines them because of that belief, even if the employee did not exercise such a constitutional right. The case was brought after Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey police force, went to a distribution center and picked up a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor in the 2005 election (Heffernan's mother had wanted a sign, so he was getting one for her). While Heffernan did not support the challenger, after other officers saw him with the sign they told senior officers, including the police chief, who strongly supported the mayor. For his apparent public support of the other candidate, they demoted Heffernan to beat patrol work as a uniformed officer. Heffernan brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his First Amendment rights. The case took a decade to reach the Supreme Court. For most of that time it was in federal district court, where it was heard by three different judges. A jury verdict in Heffernan's favor was set aside. A later summary judgment in the city's favor was overturned on appeal before being granted again in the third trial.[1] Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer stated that the department's belief was all that mattered, since the Court's precedent in this area holds it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee (who does not work under a contract that explicitly permits such discipline) for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion in which he was joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed, but his constitutional rights had not been violated. Contents 1 Legal background 2 Prior history 2.1 Original dispute 2.2 District court 2.3 Court of Appeals 2.4 Supreme Court 2.4.1 Oral arguments 3 Opinion of the Court 3.1 Dissent 4 Commentary 5 Aftermath 6 See also 7 References Legal background[edit] The First Amendment guarantees the rights of freedom of speech and peaceable assembly, among others. While not explicitly mentioned, the Supreme Court has held that the right to assembly includes the freedom of association, particularly political association.[2] These protections not only prohibit the government from passing laws which infringe upon these rights, but also from taking actions which would violate them. While the Bill of Rights—which includes the First Amendment—applied originally only to the federal government, the ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment allowed for the application of the Bill of Rights to the states under the incorporation doctrine.[3] In order to better protect these rights in the Reconstruction Era, Congress passed the Second Enforcement Act of 1871 at the request of President Ulysses S. Grant to better counter white supremacist organizations such as the Ku Klux Klan that were intimidating and suppressing voting by black citizens.[4] The act provided a remedy for those citizens who were deprived of their constitutional rights under the "color of any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage, of any State or Territory or the District of Columbia" and is currently codified at 42 U.S.C. § 1983.[5] With its decision in Monroe v. Pape (1961), the Court expanded the reach of section 1983 such that it is now used as a method of checking abuse by state officials who infringe upon constitutionally protected rights.[6][7] The First Amendment protects public employees from retaliation by their employer when speaking on matters of public concern.[8] In Pickering v. Board of Education (1968), the Court first articulated the right of public employees to be protected from dismissal for exercising their right to free speech. There, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of a teacher who was fired after writing a letter to a local newspaper critical of its handling of a recent bond issue.[9] Eight years later, this protection from dismissal was extended to cover partisan political ideology and affiliation in Elrod v. Burns.[8] But the Court has recognized that the "government as employer" has wider constitutional latitude in its decisions than the "government as sovereign".[10] In order to adequately delineate the limits of the government-as-employer's discretion, the Court developed a framework in Connick v. Myers (1983) known as the Connick test. It consists of elements. The first is the threshold a plaintiff must pass to state a claim: the plaintiff must show that they were speaking on a matter of public concern. The second falls to the employer: they must show that the harm to workplace efficiency outweighs the harm caused by infringing upon the right to free speech.[11] In Waters v. Churchill (1994), the Court was faced with two differing accounts of the speech at issue. The question presented to the Court was whether the Connick test ought be applied to what the employer thought was said or what was actually said. The case revolved around a nurse dismissed for a conversation she had with a coworker. There was a discrepancy between what she argued was said and what her employer thought was said. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, joined by a plurality of justices, opined that the Connick test must be applied to the speech the employer thought occurred, and on which it acted, rather than that which the finder of fact determines did occur.[12] Prior history[edit] Original dispute[edit] Downtown Paterson In 2005, Jeffrey Heffernan was a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey police. His supervisor and the chief of police were both appointed by the city's incumbent mayor, Jose Torres, who was being challenged by city councilman Lawrence Spagnola in that year's election. Heffernan was friendly with Spagnola, a former police chief,[1] and informally supported his campaign. He could not vote in the election as he did not live in the city.[13] At the request of his sick mother, who did live in the city, Heffernan while off-duty picked up a Spagnola lawn sign for her after her previous sign was stolen. Other officers saw him at the distribution location holding a sign and talking to Spagnola campaign staff. They soon notified superiors, and the next day officials demoted Heffernan from detective to patrol officer for his perceived "overt involvement" with the Spagnola campaign.[14] District court[edit] Heffernan sued the city, the mayor, and his superior officers under 42 U.S.C. §1983 in the federal District Court for New Jersey, claiming that his rights of freedom of speech as well as freedom of association had been violated.[15] Heffernan contended that while he had not actually engaged in any protected speech, the department acted on the belief that he had, and the department should not have demoted him on the basis of that erroneous belief.[14] In 2009, a jury found for Heffernan and awarded him damages from the police officials and the city. Despite the verdict, Heffernan sought a retrial because Judge Peter G. Sheridan had not allowed him to pursue the freedom of speech claim; the defense did so as well because Judge Sheridan had allowed the freedom of association claim. While considering these motions, Judge Sheridan became aware of a conflict of interest through a former law firm and set aside the verdict, setting a new date for trial before Judge Dennis M. Cavanaugh.[16] Judge Cavanaugh granted summary judgment to the defendants on the freedom of speech claim based on their earlier motions, holding that Heffernan had not engaged in protected speech so his rights could not have been violated. In 2012, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals reversed Judge Cavanaugh's ruling and remanded the case to him with instructions that he was to allow Heffernan to present his freedom of association claim and consider the facts from the jury trial when reconsidering the summary-judgment motions.[16] Judge Kevin McNulty heard the case on remand. After considering the parties' motions for summary judgment again, he ruled in the city's favor in 2014. Heffernan, he ruled, had not engaged in any protected speech or expressive conduct. Judge McNulty also ruled that Heffernan could not prevail on claims that his perceived speech was protected, per Ambrose v. Robinson Township, a previous case on that issue in the Third Circuit,[17] or that his actions were protected since they aided and abetted speech.[18] Judge McNulty also rejected similar claims for freedom of association. He decided that Dye v. Office of the Racing Commission, a case in which the Sixth Circuit had held that the First Amendment reached perceived political association,[19] was not a precedent he could rely on since Dye itself explicitly rejected Ambrose, and as a district judge he could not reject circuit precedent.[20] Court of Appeals[edit] On appeal to the Third Circuit, a three-judge panel of Judge Robert Cowen, Judge Morton Ira Greenberg and Judge Thomas I. Vanaskie unanimously held for the city.[1] In a decision issued in 2015, Judge Vanaskie, writing for the Court, reiterated Judge McNulty's finding that Heffernan's actions in picking up the sign for his mother did not constitute protected speech or association. He distinguished the case at hand from the Sixth Circuit's ruling in Dye by noting that in that case, the employers had inferred the employees' intent from their non-participation in partisan politics rather than an actual action they had taken, as had occurred in Heffernan's case.[1] Judge Vanaskie instead found guidance from the Supreme Court's 1994 holding in Waters v. Churchill, in which it had upheld an Illinois public hospital's dismissal of a nurse for her comments about a supervisor to a colleague, despite an ongoing factual dispute about the substance of those comments. The Court found that the hospital administration had made a reasonable attempt to investigate what the nurse had said before firing her. In that case, the Court had said explicitly that disciplining employees for things they did not actually do did not rise to the level of a constitutional violation.[1] Supreme Court[edit] Following the Third Circuit's decision, Heffernan petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari, requesting they hear the case. After the Court considered both Heffernan's petition and the city's reply, it granted the petition on the first day of the 2015 term. Both parties consented to the filing of amicus curiae briefs by uninvolved parties who believed they had a stake in the outcome of the case. The National Association of Government Employees, Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, and Thomas Jefferson Center for the Protection of Free Expression filed amicus briefs in support of Heffernan, while the New Jersey State League of Municipalities and the National Conference of State Legislatures filed briefs in support of the City of Paterson.[21] The United States government also filed an amicus brief in support of Heffernan, as well as a motion to appear at oral argument, which the Court granted, meaning the Solicitor General's office would be appearing at oral arguments, held on January 19, 2016.[22] Oral arguments[edit] External video Heffernan v. City of Paterson Oral Argument, C-SPAN[23] Mark Frost, arguing for petitioner Jeffrey Heffernan, was immediately met with questions from the justices: Anthony Kennedy asked for clarification on the particular right to be protected, and Antonin Scalia, Samuel Alito and Chief Justice John Roberts all questioned him about whether his rights could be infringed if he was not actually engaged in any speech.[24] Justice Scalia (who died before the decision was announced) argued that there was "no constitutional right not to be fired for the wrong reason."[25] Frost responded that the motives of the government, rather than the actions of the individual, were important in this case. Assistant to the Solicitor General Ginger Anders, arguing on behalf of the United States as amicus curiae in favor of Heffernan, continued this argument, stating that there is "a First Amendment right not to have adverse action taken against him by his employer for the unconstitutional purpose of suppressing disfavored political beliefs."[25] Arguing for respondents, Thomas Goldstein distinguished between political neutrality and political apathy. He argued that the First Amendment protects political neutrality, the conscious choice to not take a position, but does not protect political apathy, when a person simply does not care and makes no particular choice to be neutral.[24] As Heffernan claimed that he had no affiliation with Spagnola, the respondents argued that Heffernan's actions constitute unprotected apathy rather than a conscious choice of neutrality.[26] Justice Elena Kagan questioned Goldstein as to the purpose of the First Amendment saying, "the idea has to do with why the government acted" to which he responded, "It's called an individual right, not a government wrong."[25] Frost took a rebuttal to respond to Goldstein's distinction between political neutrality and apathy, arguing that there is little distinction as the government is acting for impermissible reasons in both cases.[24] Opinion of the Court[edit] Justice Stephen Breyer delivered the opinion of the Court. In a 6–2 decision authored by Justice Stephen Breyer, the Court reversed the ruling of the lower court and ruled that the employer's motive is material to First Amendment challenges. Citing Waters v. Churchill, Justice Breyer wrote, [W]e conclude that, as in Waters, the government's reason for demoting Heffernan is what counts here. When an employer demotes an employee out of a desire to prevent the employee from engaging in political activity that the First Amendment protects, the employee is entitled to challenge that unlawful action under the First Amendment ... —even if, as here, the employer makes a factual mistake about the employee's behavior.[27] The Court remanded the case to the Third Circuit and made clear in its opinion that, while it is impermissible to retaliate based upon perceived protected speech, the lower courts should take into consideration whether Heffernan was disciplined for violating any different and neutral policies.[28] The majority provided three main arguments in support of its reasoning: that their interpretation is more in line with the text of the First Amendment, that it better served the First Amendment's purpose of limiting political patronage, and that such an interpretation will not significantly burden employers.[29] Justice Breyer argued that unlike the Fourteenth Amendment, which focuses on the rights of the people, the First Amendment focuses on the actions of the government when it says, "Congress shall make no law ... abridging the freedom of speech."[30] As the text of the amendment focuses on the government's abilities to make laws, it is the government's actions and motives, not the actual actions of citizens, which are proscribed by the Amendment. While the policy at issue was not a law of Congress, the actions were still that of a government official that infringed upon rights guaranteed by the First Amendment.[27] The Court supported this interpretation by recognizing that the First Amendment sought to prevent government actions from discouraging protected activity.[31] Citing Branti v. Finkel, the Court pointed out that precedent never required plaintiffs in political affiliation cases to show change in allegiance to be successful, and similarly extended that logic to this case: the potential chilling effect on constitutionally protected speech still exists, regardless of the factual basis of the employer's reasoning.[32] Because employees thinking of engaging in protected activity will be equally dissuaded by an incorrect dismissal as by a correct dismissal, both reasonings should be considered in violation of the First Amendment.[33] Respondents argued that finding employers liable for factual mistakes would place substantial costs upon employers.[33] The Court rejected this argument, saying that an employee would still need to prove the employer acted out of an improper motive. Referring to Heffernan's case and those like it, the Court said that "the employee will, if anything, find it more difficult to prove that motive, for the employee will have to point to more than his own conduct to show an employer's intent".[33] Dissent[edit] Justice Thomas authored the dissent. Justice Clarence Thomas authored the dissent, in which Justice Samuel Alito joined. Justice Thomas argued that the previous ruling should have been upheld "because federal law does not provide a cause of action to plaintiffs whose constitutional rights have not been violated".[34] The dissent focused on the text of the statute Heffernan was suing under: 42 U.S.C. § 1983. The statute provides a cause of action only for those whose rights have actually been violated by the government. Because Heffernan maintained that he had not been exercising his First Amendment rights, the dissent argued that those rights could not have been violated, and that a section 1983 claim requires that the employee engage in protected activity and that the employer retaliate against that activity.[35] The dissent argued that, for a section 1983 claim to be valid, "harm alone is not enough; it has to be the right kind of harm."[36] Thomas provided an example of a law allowing police to pull over any driver without cause. This would obviously violate the Fourth Amendment rights of anyone stopped, but people stuck in traffic who were injured by the collateral damage of unconstitutional actions would not be able to sue because none of their rights was violated. Similarly, it is not enough for Heffernan to have shown injury but violation of an actual right as well. For the dissent, even if the dismissal was for the wrong reason and harm was suffered, the dismissal cannot infringe upon rights he never exercised.[37] Further supporting their argument, the dissent cited Monterey v. Del Monte Dunes at Monterey, Ltd. to argue that a Section 1983 claim falls under tort law, in order to draw a distinction between how attempts are handled under tort and criminal law. Under criminal law, a factually impossible attempt to commit a crime, such as trying to steal from an empty pocket or defraud someone with no money, can still be tried as an attempt. No such doctrine exists in tort law. Because Heffernan was not engaged in protected activity, the police department could only have attempted to deprive him of his right, so his suit must fail because "there are no attempted torts."[38] Commentary[edit] The day after oral arguments, writer Gilad Edelman criticized the Court's assumption that Heffernan never exercised his First Amendment rights, saying, "the Supreme Court may miss an opportunity to make sure that cases like his really are rare."[39] Edelman interpreted Heffernan's actions as being well within the existing First Amendment precedent. Though Heffernan was not necessarily supporting the candidate, he was talking and associating with people connected to the candidate, actions already protected under existing precedent. Edelman suggested that, regardless of whether or not Heffernan intended to be identified as supporting the campaign, he was still punished by the city for associating.[39] Soon after the ruling was announced, the decision was largely praised. Jonathan Stahl, a writer at the Constitution Daily, said that "[t]he potential impact of this case on our understanding of the First Amendment is notable."[40] Similarly, The Economist called it "good law" and a "significant development" for expanding the existing jurisprudence to perceived speech, not just actual speech.[41] Aftermath[edit] Subsequent to the Supreme Court's ruling, the City of Paterson approved a $1.6 million settlement payout to Heffernan. The final payment of the settlement is due on September 30, 2017.[42] See also[edit] Freedom of speech portal New Jersey portal Supreme Court of the United States portal US labor law Spoils system 2015 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 578 References[edit] ^ a b c d e Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 777 F.3d 147, 149 (3rd Cir., 2015). Hereafter distinguished as Heffernan III. ^ NAACP v. Alabama, 357 U.S. 499 (1958). ^ Incorporation Doctrine, Cornell University Law School, (last visited June 20, 2016). ^ Allen Trelease, White Terror: The Ku Klux Klan Conspiracy and Southern Reconstruction 387-388 (1971). ^ 42 U.S.C. § 1983. ^ Karen M. Blum & Kathryn R. Urbonya, Section 1983 Litigation (1998) ^ Monroe v. Pape, 365 U.S. 167 (1961). ^ a b Elrod v. Burns, 427 U.S. 347 (1976). ^ Pickering v. Board of Education, 391 U.S. 563 (1968). ^ Waters v. Churchill, 511 U.S. 661, 671 (1994). ^ David Hudson, Balancing Act: Public Employees and Free Speech, 3 First Reports 23 (2002). ^ Waters v. Churchill, at 679–681. ^ Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 2 F.Supp.3d 563, 566 (D.N.J., 2014). Hereafter distinguished as Heffernan II. ^ a b Heffernan v. City of Paterson, No. 14-1280, 578 U.S. ___, slip op. at 2 (2016). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 2–3. ^ a b Heffernan II, at 568 (citing the earlier 2012 decision). ^ Ambrose v. Robinson Township, 303 F. 3d 488 (3rd Cir., 2002). ^ Heffernan II, 570–76. ^ Dye v. Office of the Racing Commission, 702 F.3d 286 (6th Cir. 2012). ^ Heffernan II, 579–581. ^ Amicus curiae briefs in support of petitioners: Brief for the National Association of Government Employees as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Nov. 16, 2015). Brief for the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Nov. 23, 2015). Brief for the Thomas Jefferson Center for the Protection of Free Expression, et al. as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Nov. 23, 2015). Amicus briefs in support of respondents: Brief for the New Jersey State League of Municipalities as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Dec. 23, 2015). Brief for the National Conference of State Legislatures, et al. as amicus curiae, SCOTUSblog (Dec. 23, 2015). ^ No. 14-1280, United States Supreme Court (Apr. 29, 2016). ^ "Heffernan v. City of Paterson Oral Argument". C-SPAN. January 19, 2016. Retrieved April 19, 2017.  ^ a b c Howard Wasserman, Argument analysis: The First Amendment, political inactivity, and improper government motive, SCOTUSblog (Jan. 20, 2016). ^ a b c Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 578 U.S. ___ (2016) (Oral Arguments). ^ Transcript of Oral Argument at 31, Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 578 US ___ (2016) ^ a b Heffernan, slip op. at 6. ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 8. ^ Howard Wasserman, Opinion analysis: Improper motive can violate the First Amendment, even with a factual mistake, SCOTUSblog (Apr. 26, 2016). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6 (citing U.S. Const. amend. I) (internal quotations omitted). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6–7 ("The constitutional harm at issue in the ordinary [free speech] case consists in large part of discouraging employees—both the employee discharged (or demoted) and his or her colleagues—from engaging in protected activities."). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6–7 (citing Branti v. Finkel, 445 U.S. 507, 517). ^ a b c Heffernan, slip op. at 7. ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 1 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 2–4 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 5 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 6 (Thomas, J., dissenting). ^ Heffernan, slip op. at 4 (Thomas, J., dissenting) citing United States v. Stefonek, 179 F. 3d (7th Cir. 1999). . ^ a b Gilad Edelman, Heffernan v. Paterson and an Absurd First Amendment Doctrine, The New Yorker (Jan. 20, 2016). ^ Jonathan Stahl, Supreme Court rules on political speech and the First Amendment, National Constitution Center (Apr. 29, 2016). ^ S. M., Why freedom of speech might protect you when you aren't speaking, The Economist (Apr. 29, 2016). ^ Malinconico, Joe (October 19, 2016). "In a reversal, Paterson council OKs $1.6M settlement lawsuit that went to U.S. Supreme Court". North Jersey.com. Retrieved April 25, 2017.  v t e United States First Amendment case law Establishment Clause Public funding Everson v. Board of Education (1947) McCollum v. Board of Education (1948) Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York (1970) Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971) Tilton v. Richardson (1971) Committee for Public Education & Religious Liberty v. Nyquist (1973) Sloan v. Lemon (1973) Wolman v. Walter (1977) Marsh v. Chambers (1983) Mueller v. Allen (1983) Aguilar v. Felton (1985) Board of Education of Kiryas Joel Village School District v. Grumet (1994) Agostini v. Felton (1997) Mitchell v. Helms (2000) Zelman v. Simmons-Harris (2002) Locke v. Davey (2004) Arizona Christian School Tuition Organization v. Winn (2011) Public displays Stone v. Graham (1980) Lynch v. Donnelly (1984) Board of Trustees of Scarsdale v. McCreary (1985) County of Allegheny v. ACLU (1989) McCreary County v. ACLU of Kentucky (2005) Van Orden v. Perry (2005) Pleasant Grove City v. Summum (2009) School prayer Zorach v. Clauson (1952) Engel v. Vitale (1962) Abington School District v. Schempp (1963) Stone v. Graham (1980) Wallace v. Jaffree (1985) Lee v. Weisman (1992) Santa Fe Independent School District v. Doe (2000) Elk Grove Unified School District v. Newdow (2004) Creationism Epperson v. Arkansas (1968) Edwards v. Aguillard (1987) Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District (M.D. Pa. 2005) Legislature prayer Marsh v. Chambers (1983) Town of Greece v. Galloway (2014) Establishment Clause, Other McGowan v. Maryland (1961) Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York (1970) McDaniel v. Paty (1978) Widmar v. Vincent (1981) Larkin v. Grendel's Den, Inc. (1982) Estate of Thornton v. Caldor, Inc. (1985) Texas Monthly, Inc. v. Bullock (1989) Free Exercise Clause Vidal v. Girard's Executors (1844) Reynolds v. United States (1879) Davis v. Beason (1890) Schneider v. New Jersey (1939) Cantwell v. Connecticut (1940) Minersville School District v. Gobitis (1940) Murdock v. Pennsylvania (1943) United State v. Ballard (1944) Braunfeld v. Brown (1961) Torcaso v. Watkins (1961) Sherbert v. Verner (1963) Presbyterian Church v. Hull Church (1969) Wisconsin v. Yoder (1972) NLRB v. Catholic Bishop of Chicago (1979) Harris v. McRae (1980) Thomas v. Review Board of the Indiana Employment Security Division (1981) United States v. Lee (1982) Bob Jones University v. United States (1983) Bowen v. Roy (1986) Goldman v. Weinberger (1986) Employment Division v. Smith (1990) Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah (1993) City of Boerne v. Flores (1997) Watchtower Society v. Village of Stratton (2002) Cutter v. Wilkinson (2005) Gonzales v. UDV (2006) Freedom of speech (portal) Sedition and imminent danger Alien and Sedition Acts (1798) Masses Publishing Co. v. Patten (S.D.N.Y. 1917) Schenck v. United States (1919) Abrams v. United States (1919) Gitlow v. New York (1925) Whitney v. California (1927) Dennis v. United States (1951) Communist Party v. Subversive Activities Control Board (1955, 1961) Yates v. United States (1957) Bond v. Floyd (1966) Brandenburg v. Ohio (1969) False speech Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc. (1974) United States v. Alvarez (2012) Fighting words and the heckler's veto Cantwell v. Connecticut (1940) Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire (1942) Terminiello v. Chicago (1949) Feiner v. New York (1951) Gregory v. Chicago (1969) National Socialist Party of America v. Village of Skokie (1977) R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul (1992) Snyder v. Phelps (2011) Elonis v. United States (2015) Freedom of assembly and public forums Hague v. CIO (1939) Schneider v. New Jersey (1939) Martin v. Struthers (1943) Marsh v. Alabama (1946) Niemotko v. Maryland (1951) Edwards v. South Carolina (1963) Cox v. Louisiana (1965) Brown v. Louisiana (1966) Adderley v. Florida (1966) Carroll v. Town of Princess Anne (1968) Coates v. Cincinnati (1971) Organization for a Better Austin v. Keefe (1971) Lloyd Corp. v. Tanner (1972) Pruneyard Shopping Center v. Robins (1980) Widmar v. Vincent (1981) Hill v. Colorado (2000) McCullen v. Coakley (2014) Symbolic speech Stromberg v. California (1931) United States v. O'Brien (1968) Cohen v. California (1971) Smith v. Goguen (1974) Texas v. Johnson (1989) United States v. Eichman (1990) Virginia v. Black (2003) Compelled speech Minersville School District v. Gobitis (1940) West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette (1943) Wooley v. Maynard (1977) Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System v. Southworth (2000) Davenport v. Washington Education Association (2007) Knox v. Service Employees International Union, Local 1000 (2012) Agency for International Development v. Alliance for Open Society International, Inc. (2013) Loyalty oaths American Communications Association v. Douds (1950) Garner v. Board of Public Works (1951) Speiser v. Randall (1958) Keyishian v. Board of Regents (1965) Communist Party of Indiana v. Whitcomb (1974) School speech Minersville School District v. Gobitis (1940) West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette (1943) Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District (1969) Island Trees School District v. Pico (1982) Bethel School District v. Fraser (1986) Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier (1988) Rosenberger v. University of Virginia (1995) Morse v. Frederick (2007) Obscenity Rosen v. United States (1896) United States v. One Book Called Ulysses (S.D.N.Y. 1933) Roth v. United States (1957) One, Inc. v. Olesen (1958) Marcus v. Search Warrant (1961) MANual Enterprises v. Day (1962) Jacobellis v. Ohio (1964) Quantity of Books v. Kansas (1964) Freedman v. Maryland (1965) Memoirs v. Massachusetts (1966) Redrup v. New York (1967) Ginsberg v. New York (1968) Stanley v. Georgia (1969) Cohen v. California (1971) United States v. Thirty-seven Photographs (1971) Kois v. Wisconsin (1972) Miller v. California (1973) Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton (1973) United States v. 12 200-ft. Reels of Film (1973) Jenkins v. Georgia (1974) Erznoznik v. City of Jacksonville (1975) Young v. American Mini Theatres (1976) New York v. Ferber (1982) American Booksellers v. Hudnut (7th Cir., 1985) Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc. (1986) Osborne v. Ohio (1990) United States v. X-Citement Video (1994) Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union (1997) United States v. Playboy Entertainment Group (2000) Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition (2002) Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union (2002) Nitke v. Gonzales (S.D.N.Y., 2005) United States v. Williams (2008) FCC v. Fox Televisions Stations - 2 cases (2009 and 2012) American Booksellers Foundation for Free Expression v. Strickland (6th Cir., 2009) United States v. Kilbride (9th Cir., 2009) United States v. Stevens (2010) Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association (2011) Public employees Pickering v. Board of Education (1968) Perry v. Sindermann (1972) Board of Regents of State Colleges v. Roth (1972) Mt. Healthy City School District Board of Education v. Doyle (1977) Givhan v. Western Line Consolidated School District (1979) Connick v. Myers (1983) Rankin v. McPherson (1987) Waters v. Churchill (1994) Garcetti v. Ceballos (2006) Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri (2011) Heffernan v. City of Paterson (2016) Hatch Act and similar laws Ex parte Curtis (1882) United Public Workers v. Mitchell (1947) United States Civil Service Commission v. National Association of Letter Carriers (1973) Broadrick v. Oklahoma (1973) Licensing and restriction of speech Mutual Film Corporation v. Industrial Commission of Ohio (1915) Joseph Burstyn, Inc. v. Wilson (1952) Freedman v. Maryland (1965) Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council (1976) Hoffman Estates v. The Flipside, Hoffman Estates, Inc. (1982) Walker v. Texas Division, Sons of Confederate Veterans (2015) Commercial speech Valentine v. Chrestensen (1942) Rowan v. U.S. Post Office Dept. (1970) Pittsburgh Press Co. v. Pittsburgh Commission on Human Relations (1973) Bigelow v. Commonwealth of Virginia (1974) Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council (1976) Bates v. State Bar of Arizona (1977) Linmark Associates, Inc. v. Willingboro (1977) Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Ass’n (1978) Friedman v. Rogers (1979) Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission (1980) Consol. Edison Co. v. Public Serv. Comm'n (1980) Bolger v. Youngs Drug Products (1983) Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel (1985) Pacific Gas & Electric Co. v. Public Utilities Commission of California (1986) Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto Rico (1986) San Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic Committee (1987) 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island (1996) Sorrell v. IMS Health Inc. (2011) Campaign finance and political speech Buckley v. Valeo (1976) First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti (1978) Citizens Against Rent Control v. City of Berkeley (1981) California Medical Association v. FEC (1981) Brown v. Socialist Workers '74 Campaign Committee (1982) Regan v. Taxation with Representation of Washington (1983) FEC v. National Conservative Political Action Committee (1985) FEC v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life (1986) Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce (1990) McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Commission (1995) Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Committee v. FEC (1996) Nixon v. Shrink Missouri Government PAC (2000) FEC v. Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Committee (2001) Republican Party of Minnesota v. White (2002) McConnell v. FEC (2003) FEC v. Beaumont (2003) Randall v. Sorrell (2006) FEC v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc. (2007) Davis v. FEC (2008) Citizens United v. FEC (2010) McComish v. Bennett (2011) American Tradition Partnership v. Bullock (2012) McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission (2014) Williams-Yulee v. The Florida Bar (2015) Freedom of the press Prior restraints and censorship Near v. Minnesota (1931) Lovell v. City of Griffin (1938) Hannegan v. Esquire (1946) New York Times Co. v. United States (1971) Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo (1974) Nebraska Press Assn. v. Stuart (1976) Tory v. Cochran (2005) Privacy Time, Inc. v. Hill (1967) Cox Broadcasting Corp. v. Cohn (1975) Florida Star v. B. J. F. (1989) Taxation and privileges Grosjean v. American Press Co. (1936) Branzburg v. Hayes (1972) Minneapolis Star Tribune Company v. Commissioner (1983) Defamation Beauharnais v. Illinois (1952) New York Times Co. v. Sullivan (1964) Curtis Publishing Co. v. Butts (1967) Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc. (1974) Time, Inc. v. Firestone (1976) Bose Corp. v. Consumers Union of United States, Inc. (1984) Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc. (1985) McDonald v. Smith (1985) Hustler Magazine v. Falwell (1988) Harte-Hanks Communications v. Connaughton (1989) Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co. (1990) Obsidian Finance Group, LLC v. Cox (9th Cir., 2014) Broadcast media Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC (1969) FCC v. Pacifica Foundation (1978) Turner Broadcasting v. FCC (1994) Bartnicki v. Vopper (2001) Freedom of association Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee v. McGrath (1951) Watkins v. United States (1957) NAACP v. Alabama (1958) Baggett v. Bullitt (1964) In re Primus (1978) Roberts v. United States Jaycees (1984) Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, & Bisexual Group of Boston (1995) Boy Scouts of America v. Dale (2000) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Heffernan_v._City_of_Paterson&oldid=777385770" Categories: United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court United States First Amendment case law United States public employment case law 2016 in United States case law Hidden categories: Featured articles Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Wikipedia store Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact page Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Cite this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages Add links This page was last modified on 26 April 2017, at 21:31. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view   $$
https://my.epcc.edu/SitePages/Home.aspx |||MyEPCC Trujillo-Tarelo, Juan M.Use SHIFT+ENTER to open the menu (new window). Use SHIFT+ENTER to open the menu (new window). My Email My Email grants access to your EPCC student email account. My Classes Example tooltip text. Example tooltip text. Example tooltip text. Example tooltip text. Blackboard Blackboard is an online software tool that your instructor will use to teach all or part of your course online. Services Services offers quick access to a variety of resources and services available throughout EPCC. Web Banner Web Banner is EPCC's student information system that provides resources for students and staff including online registration and transcripts. EPCC Website The publicly available EPCC Website www.epcc.edu offers a wealth of information about the institution and its many programs. EPCC TV EPCC Radio Tejano Tribune MyEPCC Logo My Email My Classes Blackboard Services epcc.edu EPCC News Upcoming Events It looks like your browser does not have JavaScript enabled. Please turn on JavaScript and try again. Announcements Academic Calendar   $$
https://my.epcc.edu |||You may be trying to access this site from a secured browser on the server. Please enable scripts and reload this page. Turn on more accessible mode Turn off more accessible mode Skip Ribbon Commands Skip to main content Turn off Animations Turn on Animations MyEPCC   $$
https://my.epcc.edu/SitePages/Home.aspx |||MyEPCC Trujillo-Tarelo, Juan M.Use SHIFT+ENTER to open the menu (new window). Use SHIFT+ENTER to open the menu (new window). My Email My Email grants access to your EPCC student email account. My Classes Example tooltip text. Example tooltip text. Example tooltip text. Example tooltip text. Blackboard Blackboard is an online software tool that your instructor will use to teach all or part of your course online. Services Services offers quick access to a variety of resources and services available throughout EPCC. Web Banner Web Banner is EPCC's student information system that provides resources for students and staff including online registration and transcripts. EPCC Website The publicly available EPCC Website www.epcc.edu offers a wealth of information about the institution and its many programs. EPCC TV EPCC Radio Tejano Tribune MyEPCC Logo My Email My Classes Blackboard Services epcc.edu EPCC News Upcoming Events It looks like your browser does not have JavaScript enabled. Please turn on JavaScript and try again. Announcements Academic Calendar   $$
https://my.epcc.edu |||You may be trying to access this site from a secured browser on the server. Please enable scripts and reload this page. Turn on more accessible mode Turn off more accessible mode Skip Ribbon Commands Skip to main content Turn off Animations Turn on Animations MyEPCC   $$
